Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

IMPROVING ROBUSTNESS AND DISTURBANCE REJECTION PERFORMANCE
WITH INDUSTRIAL MPC
Daniel Martins Lima, Julio Elias Normey-Rico, Agustinho Plucenio, Tito Lus Maia
Santos, Marcos V.C. Gomes


Departamento de Automacao e Sistemas
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina (UFSC)
Florianopolis, Santa Catarina, Brasil


Departamento de Engenharia Eletrica
Universidade Federal da Bahia (UFBA)
Salvador, Bahia, Brasil


Centro de Pesquisa PETROBRAS (CENPES)
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil

Emails daniel.lima@posgrad.ufsc.br, julio.normey@ufsc.br,
plucenio@firenzeconsult.com, tlsantos@ufba.br, mvcg@petrobras.com.br
Abstract This paper presents an improved industrial MPC controller based on the widely used Dynamic
Matrix Control (DMC) approach. The proposed controller is specially oriented to control MIMO plants with
multiple delays that are the most common case in process industry. A MIMO filter is included in the prediction
model of the controller in order to achieve two important advantages when compared to traditional industrial
DMCs (i) disturbance rejection response can be speeded up and (ii) robustness can be improved, mainly when
errors in the estimation of the delays are considered. The filter properties are demonstrated by means of an
equivalent analysis of the unconstrained DMC using a dead-time compensation (DTC) approach. Moreover
implementation and tuning of the filter is simple and intuitive. Simulation results using a water-methanol
distillation column are presented to illustrate the advantages of the proposed approach.
Keywords Model Predictive Control, Process Control
Resumo Este trabalho apresenta uma versao melhorada de um controlador_preditivo industrial baseado
no amplamente utilizado algoritmo Dynamic Matrix Control (DMC). A proposta e orientada ao controle de
plantas multivariaveis com multiplos atrasos de transporte, que representam os casos mais comuns na industria
de processos. Um filtro multivariavel e includo no modelo de predicao do controlador para conseguir duas
vantagens se comparadas ao algoritmo DMC tradicional (i) aceleracao da rejeicao de perturbacoes e (ii) melhoria
da robustez, especialmente quando sao considerados erros de estimacao nos atrasos. As propriedades do filtro sao
demonstradas atraves da analise do algoritmo DMC sem restricoes atraves de uma estrutura de compensacao de
atraso_de_transporte (DTC). Alem disso, a implementacao e o ajuste do filtro e simples e intuitivo. Resultados
de simulacoes utilizando uma coluna de destilacao agua-metanol sao apresentados para ilustrar as vantagens do
algoritmo proposto.
Palavras-chave 

1

Introduction

on the use of linear models. Simple MPCs based
on step or impulse response models without stability guarantee are the most common in industry, mainly in refineries and petrochemical plants,
where MPC is widely used. The main reasons for
this are that (i) processes have a stable behavior
in open loop and using long horizons and adequate
weighting factors allows for stable closed-loop systems (Rossiter, 2003), and (ii) linear models provide good results when the plant is operating in
the neighborhood of the operating point. In the
process industry, the objective is to keep the process around the stationary state rather than perform frequent changes from one operation point to
another and, therefore, a suitable linear model is
sufficient (Camacho and Bordons, 1999). Hence,
the analysis of some closed-loop properties of these
controllers, like disturbance rejection and robustness, is very important for the process industry as
they can be transformed in simple and useful modifications of the control algorithms to achieve bet-

MPC has emerged as a powerful practical control
technique during the last two decades (Camacho
and Bordons, 1999). It is one of the few advanced
control techniques that have had a significant impact on industrial process control and many works
have reported the advantages of its use in different
plants (Qin and Badgwell, 2003).
Also, the MPC academic community has been
very active in the last years, approaching different aspects of MPC algorithms. Efforts have been
done to obtain conditions for stability guarantee
in linear MPC (Mayne et al., 2000 Evans et al.,
2012) or to extend the qualities of linear algorithms to nonlinear MPC (Marruedo et al., 2002)
or hybrid MPC.
However, in spite of these new theoretical developments in MPC and that industrial processes
are, in general, nonlinear, most control design
techniques in industrial applications, are based

3229

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

ter performance in real applications (Normey-Rico
and Camacho, 2007). Particularly, in multivariable industrial processes, dead-times are always
used to model the plant behavior. In such models, each signal path between the inputs and outputs may show a different delay. Although these
MPC formulations can include multiple delays in
a straightforward manner, robustness andor disturbance rejection can be poor because the controller does not have enough degrees of freedom
to achieve a satisfactory trade-off between these
two important specifications (Normey-Rico and
Camacho, 2007).
Thus, in this paper, a particular MPC strategy, Dynamic Matrix Control (DMC), is interpreted through a Dead-Time Compensator (DTC)
structure to understand the effects of dead-time
on the closed-loop system. This approach uses a
transfer function representation instead of statespace, as was presented in numerous papers, e.g.,
(Lundstrom et al., 1995 Jrgensen et al., 2011
Lee and Yu, 1994). This approach was chosen
in order to use some specific DTC robust tuning methodologies already developed for MIMO
dead-time compensators (MIMO-DTC) (Flesch
et al., 2011) for improving the robustness and disturbance rejection performance of DMC. Moreover, it is shown that the original algorithm only
needs some minor modifications and that the implementation and tuning of this strategy is simple and straightforward, contrary to the solutions
based on state-space approach, that require a
completely re-programming of the controller code.
In the next section the basic DMC algorithm
is reviewed along with the DTC interpretation of
the algorithm and its properties. In section 3 a
modification to the original algorithm, called Filtered DMC (FDMC), that allows an improved robustness and disturbance rejection is proposed. In
section 4 the implementation of the new algorithm
is discussed. Finally, in section 5 simulation results are presented to illustrate the advantages of
the FDMC over the traditional DMC. The paper
ends with a conclusion.

Figure 1 Structure of the FSP
fast model Gn (z) (the full nominal system model
is given by Pn  Ln Gn , in which Ln is related to
the time delay). Pp (z) represents how n(t) affects
y(t) and the plant is defined as



P(z)  


G11 (z)z d11
G21 (z)z d21
..
.
Gn1 (z)z dn1

G1m (z)z d1m
G2m (z)z d2m
..
.
Gnm (z)z dnm




.


In this model, Gij (z)z dij is the transfer function relating the j th input with the i th output
where Gij (z) is a delay-free transfer function and
dij is the discrete dead-time. The effective deadtime of each output i is di , computed as the minimal delay of the i th row, i.e., di  minj1...n (dij ).
Thus, defining L(z)  diagz d1 , . . . , z dn  as
the MIMO delay of the plant P(z) and G(z)
as the model without the common dead-times
(also called fast model), it follows that P(z) 
L(z)G(z). It is worth noting that G(z) may still
contain multiple delays (Flesch et al., 2011).
Now it will be shown that the unconstrained
DMC algorithm can be interpreted as a DTC controller. DMC uses the step response of the system
to compute the predictions of the outputs. For a
MIMO system with m inputs and n outputs, the
prediction of the i th output at the future instant
t + k, given the information at time t, is
yi (t + kt)

2



..
.
...

DTC Interpretation of DMC

 yoi (t + kt) + i (t + kt) (1)

where yoi is the open-loop prediction of the i th
output of the system, which is given in (2), and
i (t + kt) is a disturbance that represents the
prediction error, or the difference between the
measured output yi (t) and the one calculated
by the step-response model (Camacho and Bordons, 1999). Since the future prediction error is
usually not known, DMC considers all future errors equal to the current one, i.e., i (t + kt) 
i (tt)  yi (t)  yoi (tt). The open-loop prediction
is given by

The DTC structure used to analyze the DMC
is the Filtered Smith Predictor (FSP) (NormeyRico and Camacho, 2007) which is comprised of
a primary controller C(z) and a predictor structure, which are presented in Fig. 1. Considering
a MIMO system with m inputs, n outputs and
p output disturbances, n(t) and q(t) are vectors
that represent, respectively, output and input disturbances, Fr (z) is a n  n matrix transfer function which will be tuned to modify the robustness
and disturbance rejection properties of the system, r(t) represent the set-points, C(z) is a m  n
controller tuned to stabilize the systems nominal

yoi (t + kt) 

m

X
X
j1

3230

l1

!
gij,l uj (t + k  l) , (2)

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

where gij,l is the l th step response coefficient of
the i th output in relation to the j th input.
2.1

Obtaining the Primary Controller

To obtain the primary controller, the first step
is to write the predictions of the outputs after the
minimum dead-time di (yi (t+di +kt) with k > 0),
as a function of the prediction at instant t + di , or
yi (t + di t). Rewriting (1), the following equations
are obtained

yi (t + di + kt)



m

X
X
j1

!
gij,di +l uj (t + k  l)

l1

+yi (t)  yoi (tt)

(3)

and

yi (t + di t)



m

X
X
j1

!
gij,di +l uj (t  l)
J  (Y  W)T Qy (Y  W) + UT Qu U,

l1

+yi (t)  yoi (tt).

(4)

where Qy and Qu are matrices that represent
the weights of the future errors and the control
increments, respectively. W is the vector of future set-points and, considering the case where all
future references are constant, it can be defined
as W  1yr , where yr  yr1 (t), . . . , yrn (t)T .
Without constraints1 , an algebraic solution can
be found, which is given by

Isolating yi (t) in (4) and substituting in (3), it
is possible to obtain, after some rearrangements,

yi (t + di + kt)



m
k
X
X
j1

+

gij,di +l uj (t + k  l)

l1


X

di + 1k), . . . , yi (t + di + Nyi k)T , the future control increments vector is U  u1 , . . . , um T ,
where ui  ui (t), . . . , ui (t + Nui  1)T , and
the past control increments vector u(t  1) 
u1 (t1), . . . , um (t1)T , where ui (t1) 
ui (t1), . . . , ui (tM )T . Finally, y(t+dt) 
y1 (t + d1 t), . . . , yn (t + dn t)T .
Equation (6) can also be written as Y 
GU + f , where f represents the free response
of the systems after the future instant t + d, i.e.,
the response of the systems if no changes in the
control actions were made, and the term GU is
the forced response, which shows how the system
would react due to the future control increments.
Note that the output of the predictor y(t + dt) is
the free response at instant t + d.
The future control action increments vector
U is obtained by minimizing the following cost
function

!
aij,l uj (t  l)

l1

+yi (t + di t),

U

(5)

(7)

where K  (GT Qy G + Qu )1 GT Qy is the control gain and f  Hu(t  1) + 1y(t + dt)). Since
only the control increments of the current time instant (t) of U will be used, (7) is simplified to

where aij,l  gij,di +k+l  gij,di +l .
In (5), the future control increments and past
ones were separated in different summations, notice, however, that the summation of the past increments have infinite terms. Nevertheless, for
stable systems, those summations can be truncated, because gij,di +k+l  gij,di +l 
 0 after M
terms, where M is a sufficiently large number
(Camacho and Bordons, 1999).
With this last equation, the primary controller of the FSP structure can be obtained.
Rewriting (5) in matrix form, it follows that
Y  GU + Hu(t  1) + 1y(t + dt)

 K(W  f )

u(t)  K1 (W  f ),
(8)
Pn
where K1 is a m  i1 Nyi matrix and u(t) 
u1 (t), . . . , um (t)T . Hence, considering (7),
(8) can be rewritten as
u(t) + K1 Iu(t  1)  K1 1(yr  y(t + dt)). (9)

In the frequency domain, the control actions
are computed using U(z)  C(z)(R(z)  Yd (z)),
which is obtained after applying the Z-transform
to (9), Yd (z) is the transfer function representation of the output of the predictor structure and
C(z) is the primary controller, which is given by

(6)

where G and
H are matrices
Pm
Pn with dimensions
P
n
N
and
N

ui
yi
i1
i1
i1 Nyi  mM , respectively. Nyi and Nui are the prediction and
control horizons of the i th output and i th input respectively. M is the number of step coefficients obtained with the step response of the
system for each inputoutput pair. 1 is a block
diagonal matrix composed of n column vectors
with dimension Nyi  1, with all entries equal
to one. The future predictions are given by the
vector Y  y1 , . . . , yn T where yi  yi (t +




C(z)  


C11 (z)
C12 (z)
..
.
C1m (z)

C21 (z)
C22 (z)
..
.
C2m (z)



..
.
...

Cn1 (z)
Cn2 (z)
..
.
Cnm (z)




,


1 This solution also holds for constrained problems if the
constraints are not active

3231

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

where Cij (z) is a transfer function representing
the controller from the j th input to the i th output.
2.2

(i) since Pn (z) and Pp (z) are factors in equations
(15) and (14), respectively, the disturbance rejection will always be, at least, as slow as the openloop response, and (ii) if the controller is tuned to
improve the set-point tracking response, the robustness of the system will be compromised.
In (Normey-Rico and Camacho, 2007), it was
suggested the inclusion of the filter Fr (z) in the
MIMO-SP structure, hence the name Filtered
Smith Predictor (FSP), which can be tuned to increase the disturbance rejection performance and
to increase the robustness of the closed-loop system by means of a filter that does not change
the nominal reference-tracking response (Flesch
et al., 2011). Using the same idea, in this paper
we propose a modification in the standard DMC
to make its prediction structure equivalent to a
FSP but maintaining the advantages of a MPC
strategy.

Obtaining the Predictor Structure

The role of the predictor structure is to obtain
the expected value of the outputs after the deadtime, which is given by (4). By inspection, it is
easy to see that this equation is already in the
format required by the predictor structure of the
FSP. The first term of (4) is yoi (t + di t), i.e., the
open-loop prediction based on the step response of
the system, which is delayed by di and appears in
the second term of (4) as yoi (tt), which is used
to compute the prediction error. However, (4)
can not be used directly due to the presence of
the summations with infinite terms. To overcome
this problem, consider the relation between the
impulse response of a system and its step response

y(t) 


X

hi u(t  i) 

i1


X

gi u(t  i),

3

(10)

Filtered DMC

In the proposed Filtered DMC, the disturbance
i (tt) is now computed by the sum of the n filtered prediction errors, i.e.,

i1

where hi  gi  gi1 . As shown before, the difference gi  gi1 
 0 for a sufficiently large i. Thus,
the summation in (4) can be truncated after M
terms. Applying this equivalency to (4), it follows
that

i (tt) 

n
X

Fr,ij (q 1 )(yj (t)  yoj (tt))

(16)

j1

yi (t + di t)



m
M
X
X
j1

where q 1 is the back-shift operator, e.g.,
q 1 y(t)  y(t  1), and Fr,ij (q 1 ) is a polynomial that represents the filter of the j th output
prediction error considering the i th output.
For the time domain analysis, the filters Fr,ij
are represented by their impulse response, i.e.,

!
hij,di +l uj (t  l)

l1

+yi (t)  yoi (tt).

(11)

Applying the Z-transform on (11) gives
Yd (z)  (I  Ln (z))GDMC (z)U(z) + y(z)

(12)

Fr,ij (q 1 ) 

where GDMC (z) is a nominal fast model based on
the step-response of the system used internally by
the DMC algorithm and, if the number of coefficients is large enough GDMC (z) 
 Gn (z). By
inspection, it is easy to see that (12) corresponds
to the MIMO predictor structure of Fig. 1 with
Fr (z)  I, where I is n dimension identity matrix.
The transfer function matrices that describe
the behaviour of the closed-loop system for
changes in the set-point R(z), and disturbances
Q(z) and N(z) are2
HR (z)



Pn C(I + Gn C)1

HN (z)



I  Pn C(I + Gn C)

HQ (z)



I  Pn C(I + Gn C)1 Fr Pn (15)

hij,l q l 


l0

Mf
X

hij,l q l

l0

where hij,l is the l th impulse response coefficient
of the respective filter. Since the filters are stable,
the infinite summation can be truncated after Mf
terms. For implementation and design, the filters
are represented by transfer functions, which are
easier to work with.
Using (16) in (1), the new predictions after the
minimum dead-time yi (t + di + kt), k > 0, and
the predictions at instant t + di can be obtained.
Repeating the steps shown in the last section, it
is possible to prove that the inclusion of the filters
does not affect the primary controller and that the
predictor structure is given by

(13)
1


X

Fr Pp (14)

yi (t + di t)

Since Fr (z)  I, the original DMC algorithm
is equivalent to a MIMO Smith Predictor (MIMOSP), and as such, suffers from the same problems



M
m
X
X
j1

+

n
X

!
hij,di +l uj (t  l)

l1


Fr,ij (q 1 )(yj (t)  yoj (tt)) .

j1

2 The

dependency on the complex variable z was omitted
for the sake of visualization

(17)

3232

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

with appropriate dimensions whose elements are
0, and

M(z)  W1 (z)M0 (z)Fr (z)W2 (z),
where M0 (z)  C(z)I + Gn (z)C(z)1 is stable
because C(z) stabilizes Gn (z), the robust stability condition under block diagonal disturbances is
given by (Skogestad and Postlethwaite, 2005)

Figure 2 M   structure
By inspection, it is easy to see that, again,
this equation is already in the format required by
the predictor structure of the FSP. The first term
of (17) is yoi (t+di t), i.e., the open-loop prediction
based on the step response of the system, which
is delayed by di and appears in the second term
of (17) as yoi (tt), which is used to compute the
prediction error. The error is then filtered and
added to yoi (t + di t) to obtain the the corrected
prediction yi (t + di t). Applying the Z-transform
to (17) results, again, in (12), with the exception
that the filter is now given by


Fr,11 (z)

..
Fr (z)  
.
Fr,n1 (z)


..
.
...

1
,   0, Ts ).
(M(ejTs ))
(19)
Now, using (X  Y)  (X)(Y), (19) is
rewritten as (M)  (M0 )(Fr )(W1)(W2).
It should be noted that the use of this inequality
results in a more conservative filter design but, as
stability is primordial, this should not be a problem.
So, for given uncertainty matrices W1 (z),
W2 (z) and a defined primary controller C(z), the
robustness of the proposed controller is defined by
(Fr (z)).
((ejTs )) <


Fr,1n (z)

..
.
.
Fr,nn (z)

3.2

The predictor filter Fr (z) plays two important roles (i) adjust the disturbance rejection response and noise attenuation, and (ii) increase the
robustness (Flesch et al., 2011). It is worth noting
that, although Fr (z) can be a full matrix transfer
function, in practice a diagonal Fr (z) is normally
enough to achieve a good compromise between
performance and robustness. Also, the condition
Fr (1)  I must be true, otherwise the referencetracking properties of the closed-loop system will
be compromised.
3.1

From input-output relationships (13)-(15), it can
be seen that the filter only affects the noise and
disturbance rejection responses. Thus, it can be
designed to obtain a desired disturbance rejection without affecting the set-point tracking performance. In the case that Fr (z) is not properly
designed (for example Fr (z)  I), the disturbance
rejection response is governed by the open-loop
dynamics of the plant Pn (z) and Pp (z) (Flesch
et al., 2011). In the case of input disturbances
Q(z), it was shown in (Flesch et al., 2011) that
the filter Fr (z) can be tuned to cancel the undesired poles of the nominal fast model Gn (z) inside the predictor. By doing this, these undesired
poles do not affect the input disturbance rejection
of the system. Unfortunately, this procedure can
not be used directly with the DMC because, as
was shown, the nominal fast model used by DMC
is a Finite Impulse Response (FIR) model with no
poles that represents the dynamics of the system,
rendering the above procedure not applicable in
this case.
Thus, to improve the disturbance rejection
another procedure is required. From equations
(13)-(15), it is possible to see that the closedloop reference to output response appears inside
the other equations multiplied by the filter Fr (z).
Hence, two tuning guidelines can be derived, one
more practical and an analytical one.
For the practical one, consider the fact that,
ideally, the controller completely decouples the
dynamics of the system, i.e., the reference to output closed-loop response of the system (Pn C(I +

Robustness Analysis

For the robustness analysis, additive uncertainties
are considered, i.e.,
P(z)  Pn (z) + P(z)

Improving Disturbance Rejection

(18)

where P(z) are the uncertainties which, in general, can be written as
P(z)  W2 (z)(z)W1 (z),
with ((z))  1   0, Ts ), or equivalently
(z) < 1, where, for this case, (z) is a
full matrix, (X) denotes the maximum singular
values of X, and W1 (z) and W2 (z) are two stable matrices in the Z-domain that characterize the
spatial and frequency structure of the uncertainty
(Skogestad and Postlethwaite, 2005).
Considering the M   structure shown in
Fig. 2, obtained from the original system making
R(z), Q(z) and N(z) equal to 0, which is a vector

3233

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Gn C)1 ) is a diagonal matrix transfer function.
Simulating the nominal closed-loop system, the
dominant dynamics of each element can be estimated, e.g., a first order transfer function. With
this simplified model, tune Fr (z) in a way that the
factor I  Pn C(I + Gn C)1 Fr will have a zero in
the same place as the undesired pole of Pp (z) or
Pq (z), thus canceling the unwanted open-loop dynamic.
The analytical method consists of the same
procedure as the practical one, but without the
approximation, i.e., the nominal closed-loop transfer matrix is obtained, and then the same procedure described above is used. This method is
harder to do when the number of variables increases but, done correctly, can lead to better results considering disturbance rejection.
4




Yo  Yo + 


yo (t + kt  1)





ik+1

X



 u(t  1)


(23)

Hence, the vector Yo is updated. After the
update, it is necessary to move the values inside
the vector Yo . This is important because at the
next instant, t + 1, it will be required the future
predictions from instant t + 1 to t + M based
in the control moves up to instant t. Thus, the
first element, yo (tt), is removed from the vector
and used to calculate the current prediction error,
(tt)  y(t)  yo (tt). Because of the dislocation, the last value of the vector, which should be
yo (t + M t), is not known. However, in the stable
case, yo (t + M t) 
 yo (t + M  1t), thus, the new
vector Yo will be given by


yo (t + 1t)


yo (t + 2t)




.
..
(24)
Yo  



 yo (t + M  1t) 
yo (t + M  1t)

In (Morari et al., 2002), it was shown the recursive properties of DMC, which will be presented
briefly. This recursiveness does not affect the resulting controller, it only changes the software implementation of the DMC in such a way that it
is faster and more efficient. The recursive form
also facilitates the inclusion of the prediction filter. The filter can be include in the original implementation but it is much more cumbersome.
For simplicity, the SISO case will be used
to describe the recursiveness of DMC. The SISO
open-loop predictions at instant t + k, given the
information at t and t  1, are

yo (t + kt)



gM

Implementation


X

g1
g2
..
.

Therefore, the free response calculation is
computed as follows in the recursive DMC

yo (t + 1t)


..
f 
 + 1N (y(t)  yo (tt)) (25)
.
yo (t + N t)


Since the difference between the FDMC and
the DMC is how the prediction error (tt) is
computed, it is very straightforward how to implement the FDMC in the recursive form. It
is simply a matter of adding the filtered prediction error instead of the standard error, i.e., to
substitute the term 1N (y(t)  yo (tt)) in (25) by
Fr (q 1 )(y(t)  yo (tt)).

gi u(t + k  i)(20)
gi u(t + k  i)(21)

ik+2

The difference of the predictions at t + k at
instants t and t  1 is only the new control increment u(t  1), which was not known in t  1.
Subtracting (21) from (20), the predictions can be
rewritten recursively

5

Results

The case to be considered will be the watermethanol distillation column which had its model
derived in (Wood and Berry, 1973). This is a typical MIMO plant with strong interaction and deadtimes. A simplified schematic representation of
the process showing just the variables of interest is
presented in Fig. 3 and its transfer function matrices are given by Y(z)  Pn (z)U(z) + Pp (z)N(z),
where

yo (t + kt)  gk+1 u(t  1) + yo (t + kt  1). (22)
The recursive DMC operates as follows. A
vector with M elements is stored in memory, Yo 
yo (tt  1), . . . , yo (t + M  1t  1)T , whose elements are the future predictions given the known
past control moves up to instant t  1. During initialization at instant t0 , it can be considered that
the system is at steady state and that all future
predictions are equal to the current output of the
system y(t0 ).
After the initialization, at instant t, it is necessary to update the vector since the past control
move u(t  1) is now known


Pn (z)  

0.744
z 1
z0.9419

0.8789 3
z
z0.9535

0.5786
z 7
z0.9123

1.3015 3
z
z0.9329


Pp (z)  

3234

0.2467
z 8
z0.9351
0.3575 3
z
z0.927


,




Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Figure 5 Simulation results for disturbance rejection with the nominal model

Figure 3 Schematic representation of a watermethanol distillation column

Figure 6 Robustness condition evaluation
ever, that the disturbance rejection shown in Fig.
5 is considerably slow, as was expected, since the
open-loop dynamics are present in the response.
To demonstrate the capabilities of the proposed FDMC, a filter were designed to improve the disturbance rejection of the system
using the practical methodology explained earlier. From the nominal output to set-point response, a diagonal first order matrix transfer
function was obtained to represent the closedloop dynamics, then the filter was tuned to
cancel the undesired closed-loop poles, which
resulted
in the following filter Fr1

 (z) 
1.5786(10.8440z 1 ) 1.89(10.8697z 1 )
diag
, (10.5037z1 )2 . The
(10.5037z 1 )2

Figure 4 Simulation results for set-point tracking
with the nominal model
Y  y1 (z), y2 (z)T , U  u1 (z), u2 (z)T , y1 is the
overhead product mole fraction of methanol, y2
is the bottom product mole fraction of methanol,
u1 is the reflux flow rate, u2 is the reboiler steam
flow rate, and q is the feed flow rate. The mole
fractions are given in percent, and the flow rates
have units of pounds per minute (1 lbmin 

7.56  103 kgs). The considered operating point
is given by y1  96.25 mol, y2  0.50 mol,
u1  1.95 lbmin, u2  1.71 lbmin, and q 
2.45 lbmin. The sampling time is Ts  1 min.
A disturbance feed-forward is not considered in
this case. However, it is possible to add the feedforward action to the control structure.
The controller is configured as follows prediction horizons and control horizons are set to 40
and 10 time samples for outputs and inputs, respectively. The weights are 1 for the outputs and
25 for the inputs. This configuration will result in
a settling time of approximately, without taking
into account the dead-times, 7 minutes for both
outputs, as can be seen in Fig. 4. Notice, how-

simulations results can be seen in Fig. 4 and 53 ,
where the improvement in disturbance rejection
time and the fact that set-point response does not
change are clear. In this particular case, the disturbance rejection time was reduced from 45 to
approximately 12 minutes, for both outputs.
Now, to exemplify the importance of taking
into account the trade-off between the desired disturbance rejection dynamics and the robustness
to modeling errors, consider that the dead-times
of the nominal model were incorrectly estimated,
3 A white noise with zero mean and 0.005 standard deviation where added to all simulations

3235

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

bounded multiplicative uncertainty, 2012
IEEE 51st Annual Conference on Decision
and Control(CDC), pp. 248253.
Flesch, R. C., Torrico, B. C., Normey-Rico, J. E.
and Cavalcante, M. U. (2011). Unified approach for minimal output dead time compensation in MIMO processes, Journal of
Process Control 21(7) 1080  1091.
Jrgensen, J., Huusom, J. and Rawlings, J.
(2011). Finite horizon MPC for systems in
innovation form, Decision and Control and
European Control Conference (CDC-ECC),
2011 50th IEEE Conference on, pp. 1896
1903.

Figure 7 Simulation results with the system considering uncertainties

Lee, J. and Yu, Z. (1994). Tuning of model predictive controllers for robust performance, Computers  Chemical Engineering 18(1) 15 
37. An International Journal of Computer
Applications in Chemical Engineering.

and that the real dead-times are d11  3, d12  1,
d21  5 and d22  5. The uncertainty can be described by the matrices W1 (z)  I and
"
W2 (z) 

0.7440(z1)(z+1)
z 3 (z0.9419)
0.5786(z1)(z+1)
z 7 (z0.9123)

0.8789(z1)(z+1)
z 3 (z0.9535)
1.3015(z1)(z+1)
z 5 (z0.9329)


.

(26)
In Fig. 6, it can be seen that the robustness condition is not satisfied by the filter Fr1 (z)
and, even if no filter is used (Fr (z)  I), the
closed-loop system is not guaranteed. Thus, for
these set of uncertainties, to guarantee stability, the following filter was designed (Fig. 6)
Fr2 (z)  0.2419(z0.6065)
I. The response of the
z0.9048
system considering uncertainties with and without the filter Fr2 (z) can be seen in Fig. 7, where
it is clear that the filter attenuates the effects of
the system uncertainties.
6

Lundstrom, P., Lee, J., Morari, M. and Skogestad, S. (1995). Limitations of dynamic matrix
control, Computers  Chemical Engineering
19(4) 409421.
Marruedo, D., Alamo, T. and Camacho, E.
(2002). Input-to-state stable mpc for constrained discrete-time nonlinear_systems with
bounded additive uncertainties, Decision and
Control, 2002, Proceedings of the 41st IEEE
Conference on, Vol. 4, pp. 46194624 vol.4.
Mayne, D., De Dona, J. and Goodwin, G.
(2000). Improved stabilising conditions for
model predictive control, Decision and Control, 2000. Proceedings of the 39th IEEE Conference on, Vol. 1, pp. 172177 vol.1.
Morari, M., Lee, J. and Garcia, C. (2002). Model
Predictive Control, Prentice Hall PTR.

Conclusions

This paper presented a improved industrial MPC
controller based on the ideas of DMC and FSP
which can be easily implemented in DMC based
control loops in order to improve closed loop
behavior of MIMO process with multiple timedelays. The proposed controller modifies DMC
prediction scheme by filtering the prediction errors, which modifies the robustness and disturbance rejection properties of the controller without changing the reference tracking response. It
is also noteworthy that the tuning methodologies
of the filter are relatively simple.

Normey-Rico, J. and Camacho, E. (2007). Control of Dead-Time Processes, Advanced Textbooks in Control and Signal Processing,
Springer.
Qin, S. and Badgwell, T. A. (2003). A survey of
industrial model predictive control technology, Control Engineering Practice 11(7) 733
 764.
Rossiter, J. (2003). Model-Based Predictive Control A Practical Approach, CRC Press Control Series, CRC Press.
Skogestad, S. and Postlethwaite, I. (2005). Multivariable feedback control analysis and design, John Wiley.

References
Camacho, E. and Bordons, C. (1999). Model Predictive Control, Advanced Textbooks in Control and Signal Processing, Springer.

Wood, R. and Berry, M. (1973). Terminal composition control of a binary distillation column,
Chemical Engineering Science 28(9) 1707 
1717.

Evans, M., Cannon, M. and Kouvaritakis, B.
(2012). Robust MPC for linear systems with

3236