Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

DORIS - A MOBILE ROBOT FOR INSPECTION AND MONITORING OF
OFFSHORE FACILITIES
Mauricio Galassi, Anders Ryry, Guilherme P.S. de Carvalho, Gustavo M. Freitas,
Pal J. From, Ramon R. Costa, Fernando Lizarralde, Liu Hsu, Gustavo H.F. de
Carvalho, Jose F.L. de Oliveira, Amaro A. de Lima, Thiago de M. Prego, Sergio L.
Netto, Eduardo A.B. da Silva


PetrobrasCENPES - Research and Development Center


TPD RD New Development Solutions, Statoil ASA




Dept. of Electrical Eng. - COPPEUFRJ

Dept. of Mathematical Sciences and Technology - Norwegian University of Life Sciences


Dept. of Telecommunications - CEFETRJ

Emails mauricio.galassi@petrobras.com.br, aroy@statoil.com,
guilhermecarvalho@poli.ufrj.br, gfreitas@coep.ufrj.br, pafr@umb.no,
ramon@coep.ufrj.br, fernando@coep.ufrj.br, liu@coep.ufrj.br,
gustavo.carvalho@smt.ufrj.br, jose.oliveira@smt.ufrj.br, amaro.lima@smt.ufrj.br,
thiago.prego@smt.ufrj.br, sergioln@smt.ufrj.br, eduardo@smt.ufrj.br
Abstract DORIS is a research project which endeavors to design and implement a mobile robot for remote
supervision, diagnosis, and data acquisition on offshore facilities. The proposed system is composed of a railguided robot capable of carrying different sensors through the inspected area. This paper presents a general
overview of the robot and a description of the developed mechanical designs and signal processing algorithms.
Initial results validate the mechanical concepts considered so far and indicate that the signal processing algorithms
are capable of detecting, in real time, multiple foreign objects and audio anomalies from a standard scenario.
Keywords

Mobile robots Field robotics Security and safety of HMS.

Resumo DORIS e um projeto de pesquisa que se empenha em implementar um robo_movel para supervisao
remota, diagnostico, e aquisicao_de_dados em instalacoes offshore. O sistema proposto e composto de um
robo guiado por um trilho e capaz de levar diferentes sensores atraves do ambiente inspecionado. Esse artigo
apresenta uma visao geral do robo e uma descricao do projeto mecanico e dos algoritmos de processamento de
sinais desenvolvidos. Resultados iniciais validam os conceitos mecanicos considerados ate entao e indicam que os
algoritmos de processamento_de_sinais sao capazes de detectar, em tempo_real, multiplos objetos abandonados e
anomalias de audio nos sinais adquiridos em um cenario padrao.
Palavras-chave

.

Introduction

considered the use of robots in Oil  Gas facilities in operations that require both high precision
and strength, regardless of weather conditions.

Safety and efficient operation are imperative factors to offshore production sites and a main concern to all Oil  Gas companies. A promising solution to improve both safety and efficiency is to
increase the level of automation on the platforms
by introducing robotic systems.
During the last decade, several Oil  Gas
companies, research groups, and academic communities have shown an increasing interest in the
use of robots for operation on offshore facilities.
Recent studies project a substantial decrease
in the level of human operation and an increase in
automation on future offshore oil fields (Skourup
and Pretlove, 2009). The studies also point out
the potential increase in efficiency and productivity with robot operators, besides the improvement
of Health, Safety, and Environment (HSE) conditions, as robots can replace humans in tasks performed in unhealthy, hazardous, and confined areas (From, 2010). In (Anisi et al., 2010), it is

Among the research groups interested in offshore robotics, Fraunhofer IPA is pioneer in
proposing and demonstrating the applicability of
mobile robots for offshore inspection and maintenance tasks in loco (Bengel et al., 2009). One example is MIMROex (Bengel and Pfeiffer, 2007),
capable of navigating safely, building maps, and
executing inspection tasks autonomously throughout the topside of platforms.
Another robotic device applied in offshore environments is Sensabot (NRECCMU, 2012), capable of safely inspect and monitor hazardous and
remote production facilities. The robot can sustain high temperatures, is able to reach areas with
difficult access, and is certified to operate in explosive and toxic environments.
SINTEF-ICT is another group interested in
manipulators applied to the oil and gas industry.
Inspection and maintenance operations in a simu-

3174

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

lated production process are performed by the cooperation of a gantry-mounted manipulator and a
floor-mounted robot (Kyrkjeb et al., 2009).
In this paper, we describe the DORIS project,
which aims to develop a mobile robot to perform
monitoring, inspection, and simple intervention
tasks in an offshore platform. To this end, the
system must be able to move throughout the monitored environment carrying different sensors, analyzing sensor data in loco or storing it for a posterior analysis, and interpreting the results. The
sensors can identify abnormalities such as intruders in restricted areas, abandoned objects, smoke,
fire, and liquid and gas leakages. Furthermore, the
robot is able to make machinery diagnosis, read
instruments, and perform interventions on valves
and other equipment using an embedded manipulator.
In the following sections, we present an
overview of the DORIS project with particular focus on the mechanical designs and the signal processing algorithms. Preliminary results with the
prototypes tested so far validate the considered
mechanical concepts, and the capability of the signal processing algorithms to detect, in real-time,
multiple abandoned objects and audio anomalies
in the recorded audio signals of a noisy background.
2

(a) Robots operational scenario in a production plant

(b) Detailed zoom of the robot

Figure 1 Illustration of the DORIS robot operating in a production plant.
lithium-ion batteries, which have a small size and
a high energy capacity. Four batteries are used to
power the motors and two to power the other electronics components. It is essential to monitor the
batteries behavior so that faults can be avoided.
The power management interface is implemented
through System Management Bus (SMBus) connections, allowing the electronics system to receive
all possible information about each battery state.
The main objective of the software subsystem
is to allow the implementation of high- and lowlevel control of the robot. The tools used to develop DORIS software architecture must consider
two important factors they have to be commercially available, and provide modular functionalities. These requirements led to the adoption of
Qt as the graphical interface framework, Robot
Operating System (ROS) as the communication
middleware (Quigley et al., 2009), and Ubuntu
as the operating system.
The software provides autonomous control
(programmed tasks) and remote control through a
Graphical User Interface (GUI) in the Host Control Base (HCB) computer. The HCB is composed
of a set of processes running in parallel denominated ROS nodes, which can communicate with
each other. To deal with this environment, a new
software architecture called Robot Package Software is proposed, dividing the software into tools
(graphical windows) and components (processing
and communication unities), and grouping them
into a dynamic library.

General Overview and Main Challenges

The proposed system is composed of a robot with
cameras, microphones, gas, vibration and temperature sensors, and a manipulator arm. The
robotic device is guided by a rail and both the
robot and the rail follows a modularity concept.
Additional robot modules can be annexed to include other sensors, and the rail track can be modified by adding or replacing rail segments, thus enabling operation in different areas of the platform.
The robot will be controlled autonomously or
by teleoperation. Task managing can be either
in automatic (programmed using a mission interface) or manual mode (real-time remote operation). The teleoperation and monitoring capabilities guarantee online access to the embedded sensors, providing information about the surrounding
environment and the robot operating conditions
with real-time processing. Figure 1 illustrates the
operation in a production plant.
The DORIS project can be divided into five
subsystems electronics, power supply, software,
mechanics and signal processing.
The electronics subsystem is responsible for
providing embedded computational support for
the robot control, signal processing, task managing, and local and remote communication. The
device motion is controlled through drivers that
can receive position, velocity, or current setpoints.
The power supply system uses military-class

3175

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Considering the robot functionalities and the
aggressive offshore environment, several challenges should be addressed. Temperatures in offshore facilities can vary between 30 C to 50 C,
relative humidity can reach 100, and there may
be splash water, salty air, storms, and high extensive corrosion (Graf and Pfeiffer, 2007).
Concerning robustness and safety required to
operate in classified areas, the robot must be
sealed against water and objects, resistant to a
wide temperature range, protected from impact
and vibration, electrically shielded to avoid explosion by ignition, and equipped with a monitoring
system.
Another challenge is that the embedded computers must run heavy signal processing algorithms, requiring high computational power.
However, the power supply subsystem must efficiently provide power and maintain a low level of
power consumption.
Further complications arise because the system is designed to move in confined areas and have
efficient wireless communication with operators,
providing online information of sensors data. Finally, the robot must have a modular and flexible
design, employing plug and play extensions.
3

lows for path modification. The track corresponds
to a closed circuit, allowing the robot to perform
periodic inspection and monitoring tasks.
The main objectives of the mechanical project
are to design the rail, the traction and passive
modules, and the joints used to couple them. The
design must allow the robot to move smoothly
in a 3D space and to make full stops anywhere
on the rail. Considering the severe corrosion and
weather conditions in offshore environments, the
choice of materials are imperative to the success
of the project and certified solutions must be considered.
The robot is composed of four modules at its
default configuration, but it is conceived so that
other modules can be added. The total weight of
this configuration is estimated at 50 kg and we
expect to have a maximum speed of 1ms.
The first adopted concept considers a tubular
rail with an attached rack. The idea is inspired by
the Thyssenkrupp Flow R II stairlift. Traction is
provided by conical wheels supported on the tube,
and auxiliary mechanisms with springs improves
stability. The joint to couple two modules resembles to a spine, being composed of multiple disks
guided by steel cables with springs attached to its
ends, which turn the joint flexible. This design is
illustrated in Fig. 2.

Mechanical Design

The DORIS robot must move in a 3D space performing horizontal, vertical, and curved movements. Thus, the robots mechanical system must
be flexible and able to keep its orientation stable.
It also has to avoid sliding and move relatively
fast, in case of emergency situations.
The robotics literature shows that guided
robots are the most suitable motion concept for
DORIS. Versatrax Vertical Crawler uses three
rubber tracks to move inside a pipe (Inuktun,
2014). POBOT (Fauroux and Morillon, 2010)
and Pruning Climbing Robot (Kawasaki et al.,
2008) are capable of moving on vertical structures
using a self-locking property to keep the position
using friction between the wheels and the rail.
UT-PCR (Baghani et al., 2005) is a light-weight
robot that moves vertically on a rail with ordinary
wheels being pressed against the rail by springs.
ARTIS (Christensen et al., 2011), developed by
DFKI Robotics Innovation Center, is a modular
rail guided robot that moves on a rectangular cross
sectioned rail and performs inspection and maintenance tasks in ballast water tanks.
We propose a tubular rail for DORIS locomotion. The use of a pre-specified path reduces concerns as localization and obstacle avoidance and
allows the robot to move relatively fast through
its workspace. Motion is simple, as the robot has
only one degree of freedom (DoF). The use of a rail
limits the robot workspace, but it may be installed
to pass through key areas and its modularity al-

Figure 2 Design of the first concept, considering
a rail with an attached rack.
The main advantage of this design is the absence of sliding due to the use of a rack and pinion
mechanism. However, the rack has a complex geometry, which is difficult to machine, limits the
robot speed and has low efficiency. Therefore, the
following premise was adopted for further designs
the rail must be designed to be as simple as possible, leaving the complexity to the robot. This
is also motivated by the fact that the rail may be
long so that its cost should be kept to a minimum.
The following designs incorporate the use of
gimbals with wheels as guides for the module on
the rail. Two gimbals, one coupled to the other
with orthogonal pivot axes, are mounted on the
modules base, providing pitch and yaw rotations.

3176

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

The internal gimbal comprises four equally spaced
wheels that closely encompass the rail.
The second concept uses two sets of gimbals
and a centralized traction system, composed of
two groove wheels mounted on a prismatic base
that can slide horizontally and vertically on guide
bars through linear bearings. This 2DoF prismatic mechanism is necessary to compensate for
rail curvatures. A clamping system is designed to
press the traction wheels against the rail, applying
adjustable radial forces to compensate the robots
weight. The passive modules comprises only a
base and the two sets of gimbals only. Double
cardan joints are designed to couple two modules,
as depicted in Fig. 3.

and pitch (fundamental frequency) signatures
using a single or a array of microphones.
 Vibration analysis Use of acceleration sensors to diagnose the operation mode of rotating machines, performing possible fault classification, such as misalignment and unbalancing operation.
 Gas sensor detection of gas leakages.
 3D mapping environment 3D modeling using
a laser sensor.
The main idea of all these signal processing
features is to make the robot perform an initial
reference lap around the closed rail track, being
manually validated by a system operator. In the
subsequent laps, all signal processing algorithms
compare the newly acquired signals with the reference data to detect any form of anomaly, as indicated above. Once an anomalous behavior is
detected, an alarm is flagged to the system, which
stores all associated data for immediate or future
diagnosis, as represented in Fig. 4.

Video
Processing
Algorithms

Figure 3 Design with gimbals and two traction
wheels mounted on a 2DoF prismatic base.

Measurement
Processing
Algorithms

Events
Alarm
Event
Processor

Events

A prototype based on this design was built to
validate the considered concepts. The tests results, which are presented in Section 5, show that
the use of gimbals is an proper choice concerning
stability, guidance, and support. Furthermore, it
is possible to have a smooth vertical motion applying radial forces by the clamping mechanism.
An important advantage of this design is the
simplicity of the rail. However, the prismatic
mechanism can lock in some situations, which is
not ideal. Moreover, this model has a high weight
(the traction module alone is estimated to weight
20kg) and the clamping mechanism is complex.
A test was set up to analyze the behavior of
polyurethane wheels and the results show that
polyurethane is an appropriate material to provide grip.
4

Audio
Processing
Algorithms

Actions

Events

Actions
Storage

Operator

Positioning
Actions

Sensors

Figure 4 Diagram of signal processing capabilities
incorporated to the DORIS robotic platform.
4.1

Video Signal Processing

The initial goal of the video processing techniques
is to identify abandoned objects in the proposed
scenarios. To do so, a reference video, without
abandoned objects, must be properly compared to
a target video, which possibly contains abandoned
objects. For this comparison to be effective, the
videos must be precisely synchronized. Below follows a more detailed description of our abandoned
object detection method

Signal Processing Algorithms

The following signal processing capabilities are devised for the DORIS robotic platform

 Initial Video Alignment
To perform the initial video alignment, a maximum likelihood approach, based on the videos
motion data and a motion model for the robot,
is employed. First, the homographies between the
consecutive frames of the given video sequence are
calculated, and from them, the translational motion of the camera is extracted. By integrating the
horizontal component of the camera motion along

 Video use of multiple cameras (visible-light,
infrared, fisheye and stereo) to detect video
anomalies such as abandoned objects, smoke,
fire, liquid leakage, and intruders.
 Audio detection of audio anomalies of impulsive nature, such as an explosion or the diagnosis of rotating machines based on energy

3177

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

the track, the horizontal camera displacement is
obtained as a function of the frame number.
The obtained curve is noisy due to camera
vibration, but one can obtain a noiseless motion
model by performing the least-squares fitting of a
piece-wise linear model composed of two straight
lines of opposite angular coefficients. In this way,
we obtain a template for the DORIS robot movement. By performing a matching between the
movement template and the noisy curve being produced by the robot in the target video sequence,
the video synchronization is obtained.

of being part of an abandoned object, in sequential frames, is larger than a given threshold, empirically set. It must be noted that, in order to
correctly align the images to be compared in the
temporal filtering and voting steps, homographies
must be calculated between the used frames.
4.2

Audio Signal Processing

The main goal of the audio signal processing block
is the detection of audio events in an acoustically
adverse environment. Among the possible audio
anomalies to be detected, we consider impulsive
events, such as an explosion or any other abnormal background noise, and the machine monitoring through energy and pitch tracking.
The main challenges for achieving such goals
include high reverberation level in case of enclosed
spaces, and significant background noise of possibly non-stationarity nature.

 Geometric Registration Between Frames
Considering that the target and reference
video sequences have been properly aligned in
time, the speeded-up robust feature (SURF) algorithm is employed to identify the points of interest
(PoI) on two corresponding frames of both video
sequences (Bay et al., 2008). In the following, a
correspondence is determined in a point-by-point
level among the two PoI sets previously identified, first by eliminating the ones that greatly deviate from the translational movement restriction,
and finally by using the random sample consensus (RANSAC) algorithm (Kong et al., 2010)
(Hartley and Zisserman, 2003). Based on these
point correspondences, an homography (Kong
et al., 2010) (Hartley and Zisserman, 2003) is
computed on the reference frame to allow a proper
comparison with the corresponding frame of the
target video.

5

Prototypes and Preliminary Results

Two prototypes have been built to test mechanical and signal processing concepts. The first one
is based on the Roomba robot and was developed
to test video and audio anomalies detection employing signal processing techniques.
The second protoype, DoriAna, was built to
test the proposed mechanical concepts and traction system. The real scale prototype, made with
low cost materials, was tested in horizontal and
vertical motion on a rail composed of straight and
curved modules.

 Image Comparison
As the simple subtraction between the registered frames does not work due to the excessive amount of details in the cluttered environment being surveilled, the image comparison is
perform by calculating the normalized cross correlation (NCC) between the two images. This is
done only in the frame regions where the absolute
value of the difference between the two registered
frames is larger than a threshold. A second threshold is used to binarize the result, producing areas
that are candidates to have abandoned objects in
the target frame. A multiscale approach, with
variation of both the NCC window size and the
downsample factor to be employed in the frames
dimensions, is used in order to allow the detection
of objects of different sizes.

5.1

Roomba

To build the first prototype, a commercial
Roomba from iRobot was used. It is adapted with
supports, guide wheels, a netbook to command its
movements, and embedded sensors such as a camera, a microphone, and a laser range finder. The
device performs a back-and-forth movement inside
a cable tray with speeds up to 0.5ms.
Firstly, tests were performed in a laboratory
environment and then in an emergency diesel generator plant at CENPES, the research center from
Petrobras S.A. (Fig. 5). This last cluttered scenario was essential to allow initial algorithms research and development, given the real world difficulties that emerge.
The produced video database was used in
the study of computer_vision techniques to detect
abandoned objects in the surveilled scenario with
a moving camera. The acquired audio database
was used in the research of algorithms to detect audio anomalies of impulsive nature, eventually diagnosing machinery malfunction, also taking into consideration that the sensors were in a
moving platform.

 Object Detection
In order to further reduce both false positives and false negatives, the temporal filtering
described in (Kong et al., 2010) is employed on
the binary NCC images. After that, to increase
even further the detection robustness, it is used
a voting procedure in which a detection occurs
only if the number of times a pixel is a candidate

3178

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Figure 7 Recording scenario employed in audio
database development emulating event of interest (played in a loudspeaker) heavily corrupted by
strong background noise.

Figure 5 Roomba based prototype moving in a
cable tray at an emergency diesel generator plant.

phone was able to capture a change on the operating regime of the background pump by monitoring
its fundamental frequency (pitch) along time, as
depicted in Fig. 8, despite no significant change
on the background-sound energy.

To test the video processing algorithms, more
than 14 hours of raw video were recorded, producing about 60 videos containing abandoned objects, with 6 containing 15 objects each, and the
remaining containing a single object. A total of
24 different objects were used. In this database,
were varied the objects size, types and position
along the robots path, the amount of objects in
the same scene, and the illumination.
Figure 6 shows results of the detection of multiple objects of different sizes in the same scene.

(a)

Figure 8 Background noise captured by a moving
microphone and associated pitch analysis, indicating a regime change around 18 s.

(b)

Background-noise filtering In this case, an
event of interest (the sound generated by an industrial rotating machine) is heavily corrupted by the
noise signal generated by the background pump.
A first lap performed by the prototype, however,
is able to model the background noise, and observe that it is restricted to the frequency interval f  200, 600 Hz. Once this interference is
reduced or practically eliminated by a simple digital filter, the event of interest is easily detected
by a spectral analysis, as seen in Fig. 9, allowing a
subsequent analysis of its general characteristics.
The robotic platform was also able to successfully build a 3D map of the plant in real time.
Odometry, laser measurements and camera images
are combined to build a 3D point cloud, where
each point is associated to a color defined by RGB
values. The 3D point cloud is processed based
on probabilistic maps using Octomap ROS node
(Hornung et al., 2013), which returns a representation of the environment.
Figure 10 shows the panoramic view of the
environment and the 3D map with relatively high

Figure 6 (a) Backpack and box, umbrella, and
bottle reference frame and (b) detection.
To develop and test the audio processing algorithms, a large database was devised emulating the adverse audio environment of an oil platform and the following events of interest (i) A refrigeration pump, operated in two distinct modes,
acted as the background noise (ii) A fixed loudspeaker reproduced audio signals such as speech,
whistling noise of a tea kettle, and 13 industrial
machines, including the sound of rotating machines with different fundamental frequencies. A
fixed microphone was set close to the background
pump and another microphone was used on the
moving platform to acquire the signal of interest
(heavily corrupted by a reverberating version of
the background signal), as illustrated in Fig. 7.
Using this database, the following audio
capabilities were devised for future integration on
the DORIS system
Pitch detection In this case, the moving micro-

3179

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

(100 Hz)

Figure 9 Detection of an event of interest in 100
Hz after background noise filtering.
precision. The map can be employed by a robot
for task planning and execution, providing information for collision avoidance with obstacles in
the environment. It is also possible to process the
3D colored point cloud looking for specific patterns in the environment, such as green and yellow
pipes, or black valves.
5.2

(a)

DoriAna

DoriAna is a prototype developed to test the mechanical design of the traction module, the passive module, and the joint that couples them. A
tubular track built using straight and curved segments was installed in the GSCAR laboratory, in
COPPEUFRJ. The track comprises all possible
movements that the robot must make.
The traction module consists of a wooden
base, two sets of aluminum gimbals, polyurethane
wheels, a machined prismatic mechanism that
uses linear bearings to displace the traction
wheels, and a clamping mechanism that uses a
bicycle brake system to apply radial forces on the
traction wheels. The passive module comprises
only a base with two sets of gimbals. Two coupling joints are considered for the tests one that
uses a spring and a steel cable, and a double Cardan joint.
The main objective of DoriAna (Fig. 11) is to
test the following mechanical concepts

(b)

Figure 11 (a) Traction and passive module of DoriAna prototype moving on a vertical curved section. (b) Rail installed in GSCARUFRJ.
The force applied by the bicycle brake system was appropriate to hold and move the robot
through vertical sections, showing that it is possible to achieve motion using only friction by applying a radial force. The joint with spring and steel
cable performed better than the double Cardan
joint.
As for the traction system, the conclusion was
that the prismatic mechanism is not satisfactory,
given that it is prone to lock and the weight of the
traction system led to loss of contact between the
grooved wheels and the tube. This results suggest investigating an alternative concept for the
traction system.

 The use of gimbals for guidance, stability, and
weight support

6

 The traction system mounted on a prismatic
mechanism

Conclusions

In this paper, we presented the DORIS project,
which endeavors to develop an offshore facilities
inspection and monitoring robot. The prototype
is based on rail guided modules powered by a battery system and equipped with multiple sensors
that enable detection of anomalies, such as abandoned objects and gas leakage.
A prototype was built to validate anomaly
detection under movement in a real environment
similar to an offshore platform. Tests proved that
the device is able to detect multiple objects in a
video stream. Initial results with audio processing

 The clamping system, verifying whether the
applied force is sufficient to support the robot
in vertical sections
 The two joints used to couple the modules.
Initial tests performed with the prototype
show good performance of the gimbals in terms
of stability. Even though the gimbals may shake
slightly due to irregularities on the rail surface and
asymmetrical positioning of the guide wheels, the
base keeps a steady orientation while moving.

3180

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Figure 10 Panoramic image of the platform and the corresponding 3D map built by the prototype.
algorithms indicate the possibility of detecting audio abnormalities in a noisy background scenario.
The prototype was also capable of building a 3D
map of the surrounding environment.
Another prototype was built based on the mechanical design to test related concepts. Preliminary results show good overall performance of the
guidance system using gimbals. It was proved the
possibility of using just wheels on a tubular rail to
achieve vertical motion by applying radial forces.
A joint composed of a spring and a steel cable
achieved good transmission of traction between
the modules. The bad performance of the prismatic system led to the adoption of a different
traction concept.
Currently, a new mechanical concept is under
development. In future works, all DORIS subsystems will be tested and integrated, and, finally,
the complete robotic mobile monitoring system,
composed of traction, sensing, battery, and manipulator modules, will operate in a real offshore
platform environment.

Bengel, M. and Pfeiffer, K. (2007). Mimroex mobile
maintenance and inspection robot for process plants.
Fraunhofer Institute for Manufacturing Engineering
and Automation IPA, pp. 12.
Bengel, M., Pfeiffer, K., Graf, B., Bubeck, A. and Verl, A.
(2009). Mobile robots for offshore inspection and manipulation, Proc. IEEERSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS)., pp. 33173322.
Christensen, L., Fischer, N., Kroffke, S., Lemburg, J. and
Ahlers, R. (2011). Cost-effective autonomous robots
for ballast water tank inspection, Jour. of Ship Production and Design 27(3) 127136.
Fauroux, J. and Morillon, J. (2010). Design of a climbing
robot for cylindro-conic poles based on rolling selflocking, Industrial Robot An Int. Jour. 37(3) 287
292.
From, P. (2010). Off-Shore Robotics Robust and Optimal Solutions for Autonomous Operation, PhD thesis, Norwegian University of Science and Technology.
Graf, B. and Pfeiffer, K. (2007). Mobile robots for offshore
inspection and manipulation, Proc. Int. Petroleum
Technology Conf. (IPTC).
Hartley, R. and Zisserman, A. (2003). Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision, 2nd edn, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Hornung, A., Wurm, K., Bennewitz, M., Stachniss, C. and
Burgard, W. (2013). Octomap an efficient probabilistic 3d mapping framework based on octrees, Autonomous Robots pp. 118.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported primarily by Petrobras S.A. and
Statoil Brazil Oil  Gas Ltda under contract COPPETEC
0050.0079406.12.9 (ANP-Brazil RD Program), and in
part by CNPq and FAPERJ.
The authors wish to thank all other members of
DORIS project, including Alex Neves, Renan Freitas,
Marcos Xaud, Igor Marcovistz, Gabriel Casulari, Thiago
Braga, Fernando Coutinho, Allan da Silva, Lucas Thomaz,
Gabriel Ramalho and Raphael da Silva from Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. We also wish to thank Auderi Santos, Pedro Panta, Felipe Noel and Jose Almir from
ALIS Tecnologia for their mechanical consulting services.

Inuktun (2014).
Inuktun versatrax 150TM vertical
crawler. httpwww.inuktun.comcrawler-vehicles .
Accessed on February 11th , 2014.
Kawasaki, H., Murakami, S., Kachi, H. and Ueki, S. (2008).
Novel climbing method of pruning robot, Proc. SICE
Annual Conf., an Int. Conf. on Instrumentation,
Control and Information Technology, pp. 160163.
Kong, H., Audibert, J. and Ponce, J. (2010). Detecting abandoned objects with a moving camera, IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing 19(8) 22012210.
Kyrkjeb, E., Liljeback, P. and Transeth, A. (2009). A
robotic concept for remote inspection and maintenance on oil platforms, Proc. Int. Conf. on Ocean,
Offshore and Arctic Engineering (OMAE).

References
Anisi, D., Gunnar, J., Lillehagen, T. and Skourup, C.
(2010). Robot automation in oil and gas facilities
Indoor and onsite demonstrations, Proc. IEEERSJ
Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pp. 47294734.
Baghani, A., Ahmadabadi, M. and Harati, A. (2005). Kinematics modeling of a wheel-based pole climbing robot
(ut-pcr), Proc. IEEE Int. Conf on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 20992104.
Bay, H., Ess, A., Tuytelaars, T. and Gool, L. V. (2008).
Speeded-up robust features (SURF), Computer Vision and Image Understanding 110(3) 346359.

NRECCMU (2012). Sensabot A safe and cost-effective
inspection solution. Jour. of Petroleum Technology,
pp. 3234.
Quigley, M., Conley, K., Gerkey, B., Faust, J., Foote, T.,
Leibs, J., Wheeler, R. and Ng, A. (2009). ROS an
open-source robot operating system, Proc. Int. Conf.
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
Skourup, C. and Pretlove, J. (2009). The robotized field
operator, ABB Review (1) 6873.

3181