XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

A ROBOTIC SYSTEM FOR IN SITU HYDROPOWER TURBINE HARD COATING
Renan S. Freitas, Estevao F. Ferrao, Gabriel Alcantara C. S., Eduardo Elael M. S.,
Ramon R. Costa


Department of Electrical Engineering, COPPE UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.

Emails renan028@gmail.com, ef.ferrao@mecanica.coppe.ufrj.br, alcantara@poli.ufrj.br,
elael2@gmail.com, ramonrcosta@gmail.com
Abstract Hard coating of hydropower turbines blades increase power generation efficiency and systems
life cycle. Currently, blade coating is an ex situ process limited to unassembled turbines. EMMA is a robotic
solution for in situ hard coating maintenance. The system operates in the confined turbines environment, and
complies the hard coating process requirements. The proposed system is composed of modular and customized
rails, a robotic manipulator, and sensors for control, localization and mapping. The simulations and field tests
validate the concepts considered so far and rise several challenges for future works.
Keywords

Hard coating, manipulator, robotics, robot calibration, rail system, hydropower

Resumo O processo de metalizacao das pas de turbinas hidreletricas aumenta a eficiencia da geracao de
energia, e sua vida util. Atualmente, o revestimento das pas e um processo realizado fora do ambiente da turbina.
EMMA e uma solucao robotica para manutencao in situ por metalizacao de pas de turbinas hidreletricas. O
sistema opera no espaco confinado da turbina, e cumpre com as restricoes do processo de metalizacao. O sistema
e composto por trilhos modulares e customizados, um manipulador industrial robotico, e sensores para controle,
mapeamento_e_localizacao. As simulacoes e testes de campo validam os conceitos considerados e levantam novos
desafios para trabalhos futuros.
Palavras-chave



Introduction

Hydropower has an important share in the global
electricity production, and will continue to be a
major source of renewable power-generation1 . In
hydropower generating plants, the average maintenance cost is 2 of the investment cost per kW,
and, typically, the large mechanical components,
as turbines, must be maintained and replaced every 25 years. The cavitation and abrasion phenomena on the turbines blades have become a
concern, as the erosion can lead to water flow
instability, excessive vibrations and turbine efficiency reduction (Goldemberg and Lucon, 2007).
Hard coating techniques by thermal aspersion are
used to greatly increase the life cycle of runners
blades (Krella, 2011).
In the specific case of Brazil, hydropower
is the largest power-generation source. To support future economic growth, Brazil has invested
in additional large hydroelectric facilities, for instance, the 14 GW Belo Monte along the Xingu
River2 along the Madeira river. At the latter, the
high concentration of suspended particles carried
by the river intensifies the abrasion phenomena,
thus regular maintenance is needed. Currently,
blade coating application in these large facilities
is performed before turbine assembling by a largesized robotic manipulator.
Repair maintenance, as grinding and welding,
can be done manually in the turbines environ1 International
Energy
Agency
httpwww.iea.org.
2 Energy
Information
Administration
httpswww.eia.gov.

ISSN 2525-8311

(2010),
(2014),

ment, but the hard coating procedure requires a
robotic system due to high precision, speed, and
the usage of hazardous substances. There are several difficulties encountered when attempting to
robotize in situ maintenance, as accessibility, system placement and calibration. A few robotic systems have been investigated to perform in situ repair of turbine runners, as it could greatly improve
efficiency and safety, but none has been used for
the hard coating operation. Some examples found
in the literature are

Figure 1 Jiraus hydropower turbine.
 The Roboturb (Bonacorso et al., 2006) and
the Scompi (Bibuli et al., 2007) are robotic
systems to perform erosion inspection and
welding on damaged runners blades. They
move on a flexible rail, which may be shaped
and then fixed to the blade surface.
 The Climber 3 is an intervention robot for
3 International
Climbing
httpwww.icm.cc.

Machines

(2013),

1331

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

wind and hydroelectric turbines, to perform
coating removal, surface cleaning and coating
application. It is a climbing robot with pneumatic adhesion and locomotion by tracks.
In this paper, we present a general overview
of a robotic system called EMMA, and a detailed
description of the mechanics, the manipulator,
and calibration. The system performs in situ hydropower runners blade hard coating.
2

The hard coating process and the
project requirements

Hydropower runners blades are typically eroded
by cavitation and abrasion phenomena, resulting
in hydraulic profile deformation, thus efficiency reduction. The High Velocity Oxygen Fuel (HVOF)
coating is a preventive solution for erosion, and
creates a lamellar structure.
The HVOF is a 2000 hp power process which
consists of spraying coating particles by an 8 kg
spray gun, through a flame with mixed gases.
To achieve the best coating layer, the spray gun
should be at a fixed 210 mm to 240 mm distance,
and 90  30 angle, in respect to the metallic
surface plane of the blade and the gun should
move at 40 mmin speed along the path (Li and
Wang, 2002). Besides, for a regular coating cover,
the trajectory is 3 mm spaced horizontal lines
crossing the blades surface (coating step), which
requires great positional accuracy of the robot.
The common solution which meets the requirements for ex situ HVOF coating is a robotic manipulator with a blade-sized workspace in a fixed
position.
3

The problem

The problem is to design a robotic system for in
situ hard coating of hydropower runners blades.
Accessibility is a major problem the robot must
be brought to the turbine through a 800 mm diameter hatch and it must operate in the confined,
curved, slippery and harsh environment of the turbine. Besides, there are several controls and calibration problems, as robot kinematics and dynamics, trajectory planning, and robot localization.
The mechanical challenges are robot locomotion, base stiffness, and fixation. The robot should
be transported and positioned in turbines environment, as the access is generally far from the
runners blade. The stiffness is required for the
hard coating process, since vibrations can be propagated from manipulators base to the end-effector
with high amplitudes, compromising the coating
quality.
Regarding calibration, the relative position
between the manipulator and the blade is not
fixed. The system calibration consists in the identification of the manipulator and blade, and their

ISSN 2525-8311

pose estimation in respect to the turbine interior. Due to the environments light conditions,
3D laser sensing technology should be used to map
the topography of the blade, the environment, and
the robotic system.
Large-sized manipulators are not suitable for
in situ operations, due to the accessibility and
confined space and conventional compact manipulators do not have the required work envelope
or payload for the task. Therefore, customized
or mid-sized manipulators should be investigated
by kinematics and dynamics simulations. Besides, the robot control strategy comprises the
blade modeling, the automatically trajectory generation, and the robot position and velocity control.
4

Solution

EMMA robotic technology is described in this section. The following systems elements will be presented the robotic manipulator the customized
modular base and the robot calibration.
4.1

Robotic Manipulator

The HVOF coating requirements and environment
constraints demand a mid-sized robotic manipulator (Sec. 2). A survey was conducted to determine
the most adaptable off-the-shelf manipulator for
the application. Overall simulations and analysis
were performed using the OpenRave (Diankov and
Kuffner, 2008), an environment for simulating motion planning algorithms for robotics. There are
several tools for dynamics simulation of robots
Gazebo, V-Rep, Webots, and others. OpenRave
was selected because of its integral design for
real-time control and execution monitoring, the
core functionality for kinematics operations and
physics simulations.
The simulations were performed to analyze
the manipulators work envelope in the turbine,
the required positions for full blade coating, the
manipulators efforts (torque estimation), and
to investigate possible collisions with mechanical
parts. The simulations steps are runners blade
discretization, manipulators base computations
for full cover, and robotic manipulators kinematics and dynamics.
The blades surface discretization is the uniform sampling of the blade. A bounding box of
the blade is taken and its surface is uniformly
sampled. The blade samples are the intersections
of the blade and rays originating from each point
of the box going inward. The normal vectors of
the blades surface from each of these intersection
points will be the end-effector directions for coating.
The manipulators base computations are to
uniformly sample the turbines confined space and

1332

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Figure 2 Customized base primary and secondary rails.
to calculate the minimum required positions to
process all the blades samples, considering angle
and distance tolerances of the process. It is a brute
force search for each position, inverse kinematics
are computed to determine the manipulators joint
parameters that provide the desired positions and
orientations of the end-effector.
The kinematic approach described above is
not enough to ensure that the robot will reach
the samples. Maximum accelerations and torques
should be investigated. To do this, we employ the
well know relation   M (q)q + C(q, q)q + G(q)
(Sciavicco and Siciliano, 2000), where  is the
joints torques, M is the matrix of moments of
inertia, q is the joints angles, C is the Coriolis
matrix, and G is the gravity vector. The angular
accelerations are derived by differential kinematics q  J  (x  q T H q), where H is the Hessian
matrix (Hourtash, 2005), x is the linear accelerations, and J  is the Jacobian matrix pseudoinverse. Therefore, torques can be analytically estimated by the inverse dynamics in OpenRave and
compared to robot specifications.
4.2

Mechanical system

EMMAs mechanical system is non-actuated rails
for manipulators base transportation, positioning
and fixation. It comprises two rails, forming two
prismatic joints (P-P). The first rail is parallel to
the turbine axis, and it is responsible for the transportation of the manipulator from hatch to close
to the blade. The secondary rail is assembled from
the first by a rotational joint (R), which allows
positioning the upper rail parallel to the blades
surface.
The hatch limits the size of the rail in terms
of weight and geometry, thus a modular concept
was adopted, such that the small modular parts
can be easily and manually assembled inside the
turbine. Each module contains all the necessary
components to support, transport and position
the manipulator along it. Thus, the modules can
be simply assembled in sequence to increase the
overall length of the prismatic joint. The robot
and the modular parts of the mechanical system
are brought to the confined space of the turbine

ISSN 2525-8311

by a hoist.
A two parallel profiled rail system with a four
carriage setup4 was adopted. This configuration
creates a balanced force couple, eliminating the
reaction moments in each carriage. The frame
structure is formed by aluminum profile, since it
is lightweight, corrosion resistant, geometrically
flexible, and modular (easy rail reconfiguration by
changing few parts or adding anchor arms).
The resulting frame structure is slender and
lightweight, demanding careful dynamic analysis
of its integrity and stiffness. A Finite Element
Analysis (FEA) was performed to evaluate the
stresses, strains and forces along the structure.
FEA is also used to specify the frame components,
such as the profiles size, and anchors quantity, dimensions, directions, and attachment points.
Since the draft tube and runner area are
curved and sloped, properly fixing the mechanical base is a major challenge in EMMA. The draft
tube is composed of a ferromagnetic steel material,
hence magnetic fixtures are solution for base attachment without environment modifications, as
welding.
4.3

Calibration

The calibration process was divided in two different approaches depending on the element to be
localized and its characteristics the pose estimation of the robot and the blade.
The attachment of markers on the manipulator can be performed with high precision and
repeatability, thus reflective spheres were chosen
as reference points in the process of robot localization. These spheres are identified inside the point
cloud, the scene provided by the 3D laser sensor,
using the 3D Hough Transform method (Camurri
et al., 2014). The 3D Hough Transform, as the 2D
version of the method, is the search of an object
in its (discretized) parameter space. A sphere has
four parameters three for the position of its center, and one for its radius. For each point on the
point cloud, it is assigned a collection of voxels
on the discretized parameter space, corresponding to the possible spheres passing through that
point. As in a voting process, the voxels with the
greatest number of points assigned to define the
parameters of the most probable spheres. There
might be computational issues depending on the
size of the parameter space, but it can be mitigated by exploiting previous knowledge regarding
the expected radius and viable region for the robot
inside the enviroment. Further improvements can
be achieved through the use of the normal vector
at each point, taking into account the fact that the
center of the sphere is in the direction of the normal vector, thus reducing the number of assigned
4 Profile Rail Guides LLT Mounting maintenance and
repair instructions, SKF Group.

1333

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

voxels per point.
Fixing any marker on the blade would require
its own calibration to ensure a consistent reference point, thus the pose estimation of the blade
must rely only on the intrinsic properties of its
surface geometry. The information must be extracted from the point cloud and compared to a
reference model previously stored. The characteristics of the point clouds are represented by local
descriptors, i.e., each interest point on the blade
is associated with a piece of information about
its local neighborhood. Given the sets of features
from the model and the scence, it is possible to
determine the correspondence between their descriptors. If enough correspondences are found in
the scene, above a threshold, the blade is identified and the position can be determined (Tombari
and Di Stefano, 2010).
However, as the blade is a large and smooth
surface, the neighborhood of each point may introduce similar information, creating ambiguous descriptors that degrade the matching performance,
thus it is fundamental to wisely pick the interest points. The ambiguous descriptors provide information about perpendicular translation to the
supporting plane, and the two rotations associated with it, thus no information about the other
DOFs, making the alignment to slide from the
correct transformation. Therefore, the interest
points were sampled to diversify the normal vectors directions (Rusinkiewicz and Levoy, 2001),
reducing the number of samples to have a descriptor associated, when compared to a uniform sampling, lowering the computational cost. Once the
descriptors were estimated, the correspondences
are determined if the euclidean distance between
a descriptor in the scene and in the model is lower
than a threshold. Each correspondence vote for a
specific pose and scale factor in the Hough space.
After an instance of the model is found, it is performed the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) matching with the full resolution point clouds to realize
a fine alignment and compensate any discrepancy
introduced by the sampling.
Finally, after the blades and the manipulators identification in respect to a common coordinate system, e.g., the origin of the laser sensor, it
is possible to determine the transformation matrix
between them, which is the input to the trajectory
and coverage algorithms. It is important to note
that in every step of the operation, in which either
the manipulators base or the blade are moved, the
system must be recalibrated.
5

Results

Simulations and experimental tests at Jiraus facility were performed to verify the proposed concepts. The results are divided according to the
EMMA systems elements introduced in Sec. 4.

ISSN 2525-8311

(a) Blade discretization

(b) Manipulator workspace

Figure 3 Blade discretization and manipulator
workspace for a fixed position.

5.1

Robotic manipulator analysis

Few off-the-shelf mid-sized manipulators meet the
hard coating requirements, i.e. accuracy, payload
and velocity, and the environment constraints, e.g.
bases dimension (800 mm) and lightweight. From
the survey conducted, only 8 of the 201 analyzed
manipulators of different manufacturers meet the
requirements. Workspace analysis in the simulated environment showed that, among the 8 manipulators, the Yaskawa Motoman MH12 robot
has the largest work envelope, and was chosen for
EMMA.
As stated in Subsec. 4.1, simulations for
the robotic manipulator were implemented with
OpenRave, and consist of the following steps
blades surface discretization base position computation kinematics and dynamics.
Blade discretization is performed in a Jirau
runners blade CAD model. Fig. 3(a) shows the
blades samples, and Fig. 3(b) shows the manipulator workspace, where black dots are coated
points and blue dots are coated points with the
angle tolerance. Thus it is possible to create a
coating strategy and to select the simplest base
positions. The result is the minimum required positions for the robotic manipulators base.
For each sample, the inverse dynamics is computed with, and the estimated torques are compared to the robots technical specification. Running the algorithm for several manipulators base
positions, dynamic simulations results showed
that the robot should be placed at, at least,
1000 mm distance from the blades surface plane,
to avoid reaching maximum torque. Placing the
robot nearer would enhance the robotic manipulators workspace, but it would increase also the
torques.
Despite being able to coat approximately 50
of the blade on a fixed position, kinematic and dynamic analysis show that the MH12 robot cannot
fully cover it vertically or horizontally. The base
computations reveal that the blades top extremities require a specific base position, reachable with
the primary rail between the blades. Therefore,
the MH12 robot will require at least four positions
along the blade and one position on a primary rail,

1334

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Figure 4 Von Misess stress result.

Figure 5 Blade reference model localized in the
turbine environment with occlusions.

between blades.

5.2

Mechanical system analysis

In the specific case of Jirau, the primary and secondary rails guarantee the full coating, as they
allow the robotic manipulator movement in the
confined space by a 3-DOF base, PRP joints.
The FEA of the base verifies the Von Mises
stress and the displacements along the structures
slender members. The stress analysis determines
the integrity of the base due to the maximum loads
of the robotic manipulator. The displacements determine if the structure provides a rigid base for
the robotic manipulator. According to the hard
coating requirements, displacements of the order
of millimeters are not allowable in the elastic region of the material.
The FEA solver was the Nastran In-CAD R
with SolidWorks R . Models elements are 1-D
bar line elements with a global meshs size of
25 mm. The materials properties are density
2700 kgm3  Young modulus 70 GPa Poissons
ratio 0.34 and Yield strength 200 MPa. Boundary conditions are three translational constraints
for the anchors and a vertical constraint to the
feet. The rotational joint is modeled as a rigid
connector between the rails, such as the robots
base with respect to the second rail. The robotic
manipulators maximum dynamic forces and moments are applied, as static loads, to the point
that represents the origin of the robots base.
The maximum Von Mises stress was 4.16 MPa
(Fig. 4), which gives a factor of safety of 34.6. It
was found for a particular case where the robotic
manipulator is in the secondary rail, 800 mm
from the rotational joint. The displacement of
the structure causes a maximum translation of
0.47 mm and a angular deflection of 0.0149 in
respect to robotic manipulator bases coordinate
system.
The field tests conducted in the draft tube
for the magnetic fixtures, at different equipments
orientations and places, confirmed the manufacturers payload capacity. As the maximum tractive reaction force obtained in FEA simulations
was 956 kgf, it was chosen a magnetic fixture with
1200 kgf payload capacity.

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 6 Histogram of the error (meters) between
the model and reference scene point to point.

5.3

Calibration analysis

To test the calibration algorithm for the blades,
the turbine environment and the robotic manipulator were simulated with help of the toolbox
Blensor (Gschwandtner et al., 2011) and based on
the technical drawings from the powerplant. The
blade model, however, was acquired in a field test
by a 3D laser scanner for a better representation
of the actual hydraulic profile.
The laser sensor was modeled following manufacturers technical specifications, and different
scenes were generated for several sensor positions.
The algorithm is able to localize the blade in respect to the sensors coordinate system, even in
occlusion generated by the presence of the robotic
manipulator. In Fig. 5, it can be seen the correspondences between the reference model and the
scene, turbine environment, and also the correctly
localized blade instance highlighted in red.
The Fig. 6 exemplifies the error or distance
distribution to the closest point from the scene
to each point of the model. The mean distance
between each swipe of the laser scan is 9 mm and
the RMS error is 4 mm, which is consistent as the
half of the resolution of the point clouds.
Similar procedure was followed to recreate a
scene with four reference spheres (supposedly attached to the robot). The 3D Hough method was
able to locate all spheres centers within a 5mm
error (Fig. 7).

1335

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Proceedings Volumes (IFAC-PapersOnline)
7(PART 1) 8186.
Bonacorso, N. G., Goncalves, J. and Dutra, J. C.
(2006). Automation of the processes of surface measurement and of deposition by welding for the recovery of rotors of large-scale
hydraulic turbines, Journal of Materials Processing Technology 179(1-3) 231238.

Figure 7 Points recognized as belonging to the
four spheres (in red).
6

Conclusion and future work

In this paper, we presented the concept solution
and detailed some aspects of the EMMA robotic
system, for the problem of in situ hard coating
system of hydropower turbine. All the robotic systems seen so far were developed for repairing by
wielding or inspection applications, but the challenging requirements and constraints of the in situ
HVOF coating procedure were not yet considered.
Climbers and robotic systems on rails attached to the blade were investigated as general
solutions. However, these systems typically have
small payloads and low speed, which do not meet
the process requirements. The design of these systems would be very complex, due to the blades
temperature variation, and the locomotion and
adhesion mechanisms. The proposed system is
simpler, similar to the ex situ solution, and the
modular concept offers flexibility to logistics.
EMMA methodology and some elements of
the system was presented the customized modular rails manipulator workspace analysis, kinematics, and dynamics and the system localization
and calibration. Field tests and simulations were
performed and preliminary results show the feasibility of the concept solution.
Ongoing implementations and future work include Software integration, trajectory generation,and control strategy dynamic analysis for
mechanical vibrations and field tests with the designed robotic system.

Camurri, M., Vezzani, R. and Cucchiara, R.
(2014). 3d hough transform for sphere recognition on point clouds, Machine Vision and
Applications 25(7) 18771891.
Diankov, R. and Kuffner, J. (2008). Openrave
A planning architecture for autonomous
robotics, Robotics Institute, Pittsburgh, PA,
Tech. Rep. CMU-RI-TR-08-34.
Goldemberg, J. and Lucon, O. (2007). Energia e
meio_ambiente no brasil, Estudos Avancados
21(59) 720.
Gschwandtner, M., Kwitt, R., Uhl, A. and Pree,
W. (2011). BlenSor Blender Sensor Simulation Toolbox Advances in Visual Computing, Vol. 6939 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer Berlin  Heidelberg, Berlin,
Heidelberg, chapter 20, pp. 199208.
Hourtash, A. (2005). The kinematic hessian
and higher derivatives, Computational Intelligence in Robotics and Automation, 2005.
CIRA 2005. Proceedings. 2005 IEEE International Symposium on, IEEE, pp. 169174.
Krella, A. K. (2011). The new parameter to
assess cavitation erosion resistance of hard
pvd coatings, Engineering Failure Analysis
18(3) 855867.
Li, C. and Wang, Y. (2002). Effect of particle
state on the adhesive strength of hvof sprayed
metallic coating, Journal of thermal spray
technology 11(4) 523529.

Acknowledgements

Rusinkiewicz, S. and Levoy, M. (2001). Efficient variants of the ICP algorithm, Proceedings of International Conference on 3-D
Digital Imaging and Modeling, 3DIM 2001January 145152.

We gratefully acknowledge the financial support
of Energia Sustentavel do Brasil and the ANEEL
RD program (contract COPPETECUFRJ JIRAU 0915 6631-00032015).

Sciavicco, L. and Siciliano, B. (2000). Differential
kinematics and statics, Modelling and Control of Robot Manipulators, Springer, pp. 79
129.

References
Bibuli, M., Caccia, M. and Lapierre, L. (2007).
Path-following algorithms and experiments
for an autonomous surface vehicle, IFAC

ISSN 2525-8311

Tombari, F. and Di Stefano, L. (2010). Object
recognition in 3D scenes with occlusions and
clutter by Hough voting, Proceedings - 4th
Pacific-Rim Symposium on Image and Video
Technology, PSIVT 2010 pp. 349355.

1336