Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

ENHANCEMENTS OF PLANT-MODEL MISMATCH DETECTION METHODS IN MPC USING
PARTIAL CORRELATION
M ARCOS V. LOEFF, A NDRÉ S. R. KURAMOT O, CLAUDIO GARCIA
Laboratório de Automação e Controle  Escola Politécnica da USP
Av. Prof. Luciano Gualberto, trav. 3, n 158 Cidade Universitária
CEP 05508-900  São Paulo, SP, Brasil
E-mails marcos.loeff@usp.br, andrekuramoto@yahoo.com.br, clgarcia@lac.usp.br
Abstract One of the challenges that still needs to be overcome in order to improve the performance of the model predictive
control (MPC) is its maintenance. Re-identification of the process is one of the best options available to update the internal model
of the MPC, in order to improve performance. However, re-identification is costly. Researchers have proposed two different
methods that are able to detect plant mismatch through partial correlation analysis. Using these techniques, instead of re identifying all the submodels in the process, only a few inputs would have to be perturbed and only the degraded p arts of the
model would be updated. Nevertheless, although both approaches are efficient in detecting significant mismatch, they do not
provide enough information about its magnitude. This paper presents a novel method that can detect the magnitude of mismatch.
T his method consists of adding offline white noise with different variances before analysing the partial correlation, in order to detect the magnitude of mismatch. A simulation case study confirms the efficacy of this new technique.
Ke ywords Model Predictive Control, Bias Analysis, Plant -Model Mismatch, Partial Correlation Analysis
Re sumo Um dos desafios que ainda precisa ser superado para melhorar o desempenho do controle_preditivo (MPC) é a sua
manutenção. A reidentificação do processo é uma das melhores opções disponíveis para atualizar o modelo interno do MPC, a
fim melhorar seu desempenho. No entanto, o processo de reidentificação é dispendioso. Pesquisadores propuseram dois métodos
diferentes, capazes de detectar divergências entre o processo real e seu modelo, através da análise de correlações parciais. Através destas técnicas, não é necessário reidentificar e atualizar todos os submodelos do processo, mas apenas aqueles que possuem
divergência significativa, segundo os resultados desses métodos. No entanto, apesar de ambas as abordagens serem eficientes na
detecção de divergências, elas não fornecem informações suficientes sobre sua magnitude. Este trabalho propõe um novo método
que pode detectar a magnitude das divergências, que consiste na adição de ruído branco com variâncias diferentes nos dados coletados, antes da análise_da_correlação_parcial. Um estudo de caso confirma a eficácia desta nova técnica.
Palavras-chave .

1 Introduction

which requires performing several system identifications, as shown in Section 2. In order to develop a
method more appealing to industry, Carlsson (2010)
applies the conventional definition of partial correlation, which, as will be shown in Section 3, applies
the least squares method. It is considered simpler to
implement, as it requires less computational effort
but it is still robust. In Section 3 will be demonstrated
that the Carlssons method is in fact a particular
solution to the Badwe et al.s method.
Although both methods are able to detect the submodels with plant mismatch, they do not provide
information about the magnitude of the mismatch.
The paper analyzes the Badwe et al.s and Carlssons
methods and presents a method to check whether or
not identification through bias analysis is efficient.
Also, a novel method is proposed to provide add itional information about the magnitude of the detected mismatch. This method is not supposed to substitute the previous ones but to be an extension of them.
The next sections describe both methods and provide
some tools to check if their results are valid, by analyzing mainly their bias.

Model Predictive Control (MPC) is an important
advanced control technique for complex multivariable plants, which has been widely and success fully
applied to various processes in many industries. As
MPC uses a model based control strategy, its performance is related to the quality of the plant model.
According to (Kano and Ogawa, 2009), there are still
problems that need to be solved, in order to improve
the performance of this type of advanced control, that
is, increase production and reduce costs. One of them
is the maintenance of MPC. Changes in the characteristics of the process are one important factor accounting for the deterioration of the plant model
(Kano and Ogawa, 2009). Hence, re-identification of
the plant is the key for maintenance.
Nevertheless, re-identifying the process model with a
large number of inputs and outputs is costly. Detecting plant-model mismatch can reduce the cost of this
re-identification, by selecting a set of submodels with
more significant mismatch. In this case, reidentification of all the submodels is not necessary,
but only the ones detected by the algorithm.
In 2009, Badwe et al. proposed a new method using
partial correlation analysis between the model residuals and the manipulated variables , to detect plant
mismatch in multivariable systems. In one of its
steps, it is necessary to use dynamic models in the
regression step (refer to Equations (3) and (5)),

2 Badwe et al.s Method
According to Badwe et al. (2009), if the MVs
are correlated between each other, a regular correlation analysis between the residuals and the MVs
777

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

might not be proportional to the model-plant mismatch. Even if the process and the model are exactly
the same for some channels, model-plant mismatch
might be detected incorrectly.
Badwe et al. (2009) proposed a new method using partial correlation analysis using dynamic models
in the regression step in order to overcome this limitation.
Before applying this new methodology, data
from MVs (manipulated variables) and residuals are
obtained with sufficient excitation. Then, the disturbance free components of the MVs are found.
and
are the true models and  and  are estimated

The least squares (LS) solution to the estimate of
will be


( )
( )
( )
 ( )


 ( )

( )

 ( )

( )

(8)

( )

(
)
 ( )(

(9)
(10)

)

The corresponding procedure to compute is
 ( )

( )

 ( )(

)

(11)

Notice that the regular correlation between  ( )
and  ( ) when using a FIR structure and the LS
method, Equations (10) and (11), is the same analysis
of the partial correlation with previous input between
( ) and ( ) showed by Carlsson (2010).
Hence, it was demonstrated here that the Carlssons
method is a particular solution of the Badwe et al.s
method (2009), when the models used to estimate
 ( ) and  ( ) are FIR structures, with its param-

(1)
(2)

2 A corresponding procedure is used to estimate the
component of the j-th model residual,  ( ) , that
is uncorrelated with the rest of MVs,  ( )
( )

)

The vector of residuals is calculated by Equation
(10)

linear time-invariant (LTI) models from MVs and
residuals.
The next steps of the correlation analysis using dynamic models are
1 Evaluate  ( ) that is the component of the i-th
input of the model, ( ) , that is uncorrelated with
the rest of MVs,  ( ). That is
( )
 ( )

(

eters estimated by the LS method.

( )

(3)

4.1 Model Bias in Correlation Analysis

 ( )

(4)

The bias is defined based on the model parameters
(Aguirre, 2007)

3 Evaluate the correlation between  ( ) and
 ( ) . A zero value for the correlation indicates
no mismatch. On the other hand, the model-plant
mismatch is more significant as the correlation increases in modulus.

b

 

(12)

However, considering a LTI model, 
combination of 


is a linear

(13)

3 Carlssons Method
where
is called linear estimator of the model parameters. Particularly,
(
)
is a LS
estimator (10).
Besides that,

If
is identified using a time domain structure of
order using N samples, then
( )
( )


(


)

( )

( )
( )



( )

 (


(5)


(

)



(

)

where
is the parameter vector of
and ( ) is
the regressor vector related to  ( ). Particularly,
considering a finite impulse response (FIR) structure
 ( )  (

)

 (

)

)






(14)

Therefore, the bias will not be approximately zero if
and
are correlated. The same conclusion is
valid for
.

(6)

( )



It can be concluded that in order for this technique to
give non biased results, it needs to guarantee that
and the estimator
are uncorrelated, which means
that
is orthogonal to the plane of regressors .

(7)

The same is valid for

778

. If these conditions are not

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

respected,  or  will be biased and, therefore, so
will  ( ) and  ( ) . The geometrical interpreta ( )

tion of this phenomenon is shown in Figure 1.

(17)




 







Figures 2 and 3 show the results of Carlssons and
Badwe et al.s methods, respectively, when
and the noise variance is
.







2

2

 



Fig. 1. Geometrical interpretation of partial correlation using the
LS method.

The LS method provides the estimated components  ( ) and  ( ) that are orthogonal to the
plane of regressors . In FIR structure, regressors
are related only to  ( ). Otherwise, in an equation
error structure, as ARX or ARMAX, regressors consist of  ( ) and ( ) or ( ) . In this case,
and
can be correlated to estimator

Fig. 2. Partial correlation results of Carlssons method.

resulting in bias.

A plant-model mismatch was correctly detected only
in MV1-CV1, by both methods. Nevertheless, to
analyze the behavior concerning the plant-model
mismatch magnitude, some simulations were carried
out for different values of , varying from 0.5 to 2
and for different noise variances. The results are
depicted in Figure 4 and it shows the correlation of
the first lag when using partial correlation with the
previous inputs, which corresponds to Carlssons
method.

For example, even when the noise summed at the
plant output is white, parameters of the ARX model
 will be biased because
will be correlated to
the regressors. Then, it is convenient to use OE structures, applying this correlation analysis with dynamic
models. Expression (15) represents the output-error
(OE) structure.
( )

(

)

(

)

( )

( )

(15)

(
) and (
) are monic polynomials in
and ( ) is white noise. The FIR structure is a par)
ticular type of OE structure ( (
).
4 Simulation Presentation
We carried out a simulation of a process with
two inputs and two outputs controlled by an MPC, in
order to show the limitations in both methods concerning the detection of the plant-model mismatch
( )
magnitude. The representation of this process
and the model used in the MPC  ( ) are shown in
(16) and (17). Noise is added to each output.

( )

Fig. 3. Partial correlation results of Badwe et al.s method

(16)



779

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

(

( )




Notice that there is plant-model mismatch on all
submodels.
Figure 5 shows the partial correlations using OE
structure with fixed size for different lags when identifying a 3x3 model.
The orders of (
) and (
) are defined by
the variables
and , respectively. The time delay
from the B-polynomial is defined by .
The cross-correlation between the residuals and the
estimated
(  ) is approximately zero, excluding
the one related to the third input and the third output,
which is almost 1 for all the lags, as shown in Figure 6.

Fig. 4. Influence of the online noise variance and in the results
of partial correlation with gain mismatch.

It is expected that the magnitude of the plant-model
mismatch would be proportional to
, reaching
its higher values at
and
and having
values of approximately zero when
. This behavior does not occur with the correlation results
shown in Figure 4, which has several curves for
different online white noise variances , as they were
added to ( ) in the simulations for different values. The results for a noise variance of
show
that for high noise variances, the values of the correlation are not trustworthy, given that when
, the
values of the correlation continue negative due to the
influence of the noise in the process. The second
conclusion is that the values of the correlation are not
proportional to the plant-model mismatch magnitude,
even for small noise variance. For
2 and
, the correlations are almost constant, which
means that both methods are not able to detect this
magnitude of gain mismatch.

Fig. 5. Partial correlation using Badwe et al.s method method
with
and
.

5 Order of the models

Hence, Figure 5 shows incorrectly that there is no
mismatch in the pair MV3-CV3, as  ( )
( ).

In this section, a process is used to study the influence of the model order using an OE structure in the
results of Badwe et al.s method. The noise variance
used in this simulation is
and the noise
model to generate the colored noise ( ) is
( )

)

(

( )

)

The process
( ) and its model  ( ) are shown in
expressions (19) and (20).

(

( )


)


Fig. 6. Cross-correlation between the residuals and the estimated
with
and
.

780

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

The same procedure is performed in this method,
using correlation analysis instead of the stepwise
regression. In the simulations, the online noise variance should be low enough not to interfere in the
correlation results. Then, different variances of offline white noise are added artificially to the residual
 ( ) before calculating the final result of the partial correlation analysis, which is the regular correlation between  ( ) and  ( ) . The idea of this
procedure is to measure the change of the correlation
results with the addition of the offline white noises ,
in order to determine the plant-model mismatch
magnitude. The smaller is this change, the higher is
the magnitude of the mismatch. We will illustrate
this proposal with the simulation described next.
In this section, the process and the model used are
slightly different than the ones in section 4. Two
types of mismatch are present. One fixed gain mismatch is present in MV1-CV1 and the other time
constant mismatch depends on , which influences
the value of MV2-CV1. The process and the model
are represented by the transfer functions in expressions (21) and (22), respectively.

One way to overcome this problem is to test different
model orders, until a model with small cross correlation values is found. The new model found
has
and
. Hence, Figure 7 is
plotted, detecting correctly the mismatch for every
pairs of inputs and outputs. The related cross correlation is shown in Figure 8 and in this case, the
cross-correlation values are approximately zero for
the lags of the nine submodels. Thus, a model in
which  ( ) or  ( ) are not orthogonal to the
plane
 ( ) can lead to an erroneous analysis of
model mismatch.

(

( )

)
(21)





Fig. 7. Partial correlation using Badwe et al.s method with
and
0.

( )

(22)




In this scenario, after running many simulations, Figure
9 was plotted. It shows the values of the correlation for
different values and offline white noise variances .

Fig. 8. Cross-correlation between the residuals and the est imated with
and
0.

6 Proposed New Method
6.1 The novel method using FIR structures

Fig. 9. Influence of the offline noise variance in the result of
correlation using Carlssons method (gain in the x-axis).

In order to overcome the limitation cited in section 4, we propose a new method. It is inspired by
Kano et al. (2010), in which white noise is artificially
added to model residuals before the stepwise method
is executed.

The conclusion is that raising the variance of the
offline white noise, reduces the modulus of the correlations. If the derivative of each curve were calculat-

781

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

ed at the point of intersection of all curves close to
and the x-axis, the curves with lower variances
of offline white noise would have the higher derivative. This could be quickly observed if a straight line
were plotted for each curve using values of
and
, checking the angle between this line
and the horizontal line. The angle found is an approximation of the calculated derivative. Finally,
curves with lower noise variances have higher values
of correlation in modulus compared to the curves
with higher variances. In Figure 10 we present the
same information as in Figure 9, but in a different
form. Instead of plotting curves for every noise variance and having in the x-axis, in this new figure, a
curve for every is plotted, having noise variance in
the x-axis. Finally, a semilogarithmic scale was used

in the x-axis, in order to make it easier to visualize
the results.
With the information and values from Figure 10, this
paper proposes a technique to calculate the plantmodel mismatch magnitude, proportional to (
), using the values from a curve generated from a
specific .
To accomplish this result, there are two useful pieces
of information that need to be extracted for every
curve related to a specific . First, there is the value
of the correlation calculated with the lower variance
of white noise (
). The second factor is the
behavior of the curve with the increase of the white
noise variance.

Fig. 10 Influence of the offline noise variance in the result of correlation using Carlssons method (noise variance in the x-axis).

Concerning the second factor, curves with higher
mismatch tend to have smaller differences between
their initial correlation value (
) and any
other correlation value generated with noise variances within a certain range . The correlation values are more influenced by the process for low noise
variances. For high offline noise variances, the noise
is the main factor that influences the results. is the
range of offline noise variance that corresponds to
the transition from high to low correlation values in
modulus, with the increase of the offline noise variance. In this case, the range of noise variance chosen
was between 0.01 and 0.5.
Another variable
(
) is defined as the
difference between
and the correlation
related to the noise variance
, which must be
inside the range of .
) , using
We are going to propose a function (
(
) as inputs. The results of
and
should be proportional to the plant-model mismatch magnitude. Thus, there is no need to calculate

or compute the angle or the derivative mentioned
previously.
The result of a specific curve related to is
(

)

(

)

(23)

The term was added, in order to avoid having infinite or very high values for when
is very
small.
It is important to clarify that there are a lot of different functions
for the same inputs, that will give
good or even better results. Nevertheless, the results
obtained with expression (23) for this scenario shows
the potential of this method.
Choosing the variance to be calculated and the range
of variances is not a simple task. And even doing it
properly, it is not guaranteed to provide significant
results for a given noise variance. Hence, this paper
suggests taking the average of four noise variances
within the previous defined range, in order to enhance the results. This average is the magnitude of

782

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

mismatch of the submodel. The results of each variance calculated and its results are shown in Figure
11.

Fig. 13. Magnitude of mismatch for MV1-CV1.

6.2 The novel method using OE structures
Fig. 11.

values for different noise variances.

The previous subsection showed a successful method, applying partial correlation analysis using the
least squares method and FIR structures.
Nevertheless, one question that remains is whether
this same technique could be used with partial correlation analysis using OE structures. As the FIR structure is a particular type of OE structure, we are referring to the OE structures which are not FIR structures
or with ( ) different than 1.
As we present next, there are some issues with the
results of the simulations using OE structures. Figure
14 shows the values of the correlation for different
values and offline white noise variances using Badwe
et al.s method (similar to Figure 9). There are two
values of k (1.05 and 1.45) which result in unexpected correlation values and that would influence
the final results of the plant-model mismatch magnitude. Figure 15 shows the cross-correlation between
the residuals and
and when using FIR and OE
structures for the first lag. The correlation for the FIR
structures are close to zero for every . This behavior
does not occur when using OE structure as when
, for instance, the correlation is -1, which
means that the result is biased and, therefore, a new
order of the model should be chosen, as shown in
section 5.

After calculating the average, the final result would
be as in Figure 12, whose values are proportional to
as expected.
This submodel of MV1-CV1 has a fixed gain mismatch and its results are shown in Figure 13. The fact
that the
values are almost constant for every is
expected, as has influence only in MV2-CV1.

Fig. 12. Magnitude of mismatch for MV2-CV1.

783

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

In this paper, a novel method to detect the magnitude
of plant mismatch using MPC is proposed, by using
partial correlation with previous inputs , that use the
least squares approach and FIR structures. Tests
show that this technique does not substitute any
method, but complements them. Partial correlation
analysis using OE structures provides significant
results to detect mismatch, but should not be used
within the proposed technique, due to higher probability of unbiased results.
Because there are many questions still to be answered, this is not a complete solution to solve this
type of problem. Future works could be conducted to
address the following aspects i) this method was
only tested in a 2x2 plant with first order plus dead
time submodels. What would be the results using
more complex submodels and process with more
inputs and outputs? ii) in the presented case study
there were two types of mismatch gain and time
constant. Would this method be able to detect time
delay mismatch as well? iii) is this method capable of
detecting magnitude mismatch using real data?
The results presented in this paper can trigger the
development of more research in this area and contribute to the enhancement of methods to detect
plant-mismatch.

Fig. 14. Influence of the offline noise variance in the result of
correlation using Badwe et al.s method (gain in the x-axis).

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the support provided by FAPESP
to participate in this event.
References

Fig. 15. Cross-correlation between the residuals and the estimated u and e .

Aguirre L. A. Introduction to system identification 
linear and non-linear techniques for real systems.
3rd edition, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, 2007. In
Portuguese.
Badwe, A. S. Gudi, R. D. Patwardhan, R. S. Shah,
S. L. Patwardhan, S. C. Detection of model-plant
mismatch in MPC applications. Journal of Process
Control, 19(8)13051313, Sep 2009.
Carlsson, R. A practical approach to detection of
plant model mismatch for MPC. Master thesis.
Linkping University, 2010.
Kano, M. Shigi, Y. Hasebe, S. Ooyama, S.
Detection of Significant Model-Plant Mismatch
from Routine Operation Data of Model Predictive
Control System. The 9th International Symposium
on Dynamics and Control of Process Systems
(DYCOPS 2010) pp. 677-682, Leuven, Belgium,
2010.
Kano, M. Ogawa, M. The state of the art in
advanced chemical process control in Japan. In
IFAC Symposium on Advanced Control of
Chemical Processes (ADCHEM), CDROM.
Istanbul, Turkey, 2009.
Ljung, L. System Identication. Theory for the User.
2nd edition, Englewood Cliffs, NJ Prentice Hall,
1999.

Although using a new order of OE structure for the
simulations with
would solve the problem
of cross correlation, it may not lead to trustworthy
results, as in order to compare the correlation results
it is important to guarantee that the conditions of the
simulation are the same. This would not happen in
case two different sizes of OE structure are used in
the procedure.
7 Conclusions
As we showed above, the techniques of Badwe
et al. and Carlsson are able to properly detect the
mismatch, but do not provide information about its
magnitude. Gain mismatch of 10 and 50 might
have similar results.
We also showed that Carlssons method is a simplification of Badwe et al.s method, due to the fact that
it uses a specific least squares approach with FIR
structures instead of a general identification using
OE structures. In order to get consistent analysis
results applying Badwe et al.s method, it is relevant
to choose convenient model structures in order to get
unbiased estimations of the dynamic model parameters.

784