THREE-PHASE POWER ELECTRONIC LOAD FOR BURN-IN-TEST
Bruno W. França, Leonardo F. da Silva, Maurício Aredes
LEMT  Laboratório de Eletrônica de Potência e Média Tensão, Programa de Engenharia Elétrica,
COPPEUFRJ
Centro de Tecnologia, Bloco I, sala I-156, Cidade Universitária, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil
CEP 21.949-900 Caixa Postal 68504
E-mails bruno@lemt.ufrj.br, leonardo@lemt.ufrj.br, aredes@lemt.ufrj.br
Abstract  In this paper is proposed a Power Electronic Load (PEL), which simulates four load configurations balanced, unbalanced,
harmonic and unbalanced harmonic. Thus, this PEL is able to burn-in-test not only series equipment as AC power sources, but also shunt
equipment as shunt Power Conditioning. In this way, the control strategy is presented based on the p-q Theory, that allows recover the
average active power to the electric network bus as an ideal source connected to this bus. PSCADEMTDC simulation results are provided in
order to show the fast dynamic and the robustness algorithm.
Keywords  Power Electronic Load, p-q Theory, PSCADEMTDC, burn-in-test.
Resumo  Neste artigo é proposto uma Carga Eletrônica, a qual simula quatro tipos de configuração de carga equilibrada,
desequilibrada, harmônica e harmônica desequilibrada. Desta forma, essa Carga Eletrônica é capaz de avaliar não somente equipamentos
conectados em série, tal como fontes CA, mas também equipamentos conectados em paralelo, como por exemplo, equipamentos
condicionadores_de_energia conectados em paralelo. Assim sendo, a estratégia de controle é apresentada baseada na Teoria p-q, que permite
restituir a potência_ativa média consumida para a rede_elétrica como uma fonte ideal conectada a mesma. Por fim, são apresentados
resultados de simulação utilizando o PSCADEMTDC, com o intuito de mostrar a dinâmica e robustez do algoritmo de controle
desenvolvido.
Palavras-chave  .

1.

example, then the PEL has to drain a harmonic current
to test the Power Conditioning adequately.
The Instantaneous Power Theory (p-q Theory)
(Akagi, et al., 2007) has been expressively used in
recent researches to develop control strategies, as in
(Akagi, et al., 2007), (Watanabe, et al., 2008) and
(Aredes, et al., 2009). The control strategy developed
in this paper is based on the p-q Theory and will be
presented through equations and block diagrams.
The Section 2 will describe the PEL topology,
based on a back-to-back three-phase PWM rectifier
and its connection with the tested element (AC power
source or Power Conditioning). Then, in Section 3,
the control strategy is shown in two parts, the Power
Recovery and Link dc Controller and the Load
Simulator Controller. The simulation results are
presented in Section 4 and, at last, Section 5 presents
the conclusions.

Introduction

Power Electronic Load (PEL) is traditionally
employed to burn-in-test AC power sources, motor
drives etc. The main characteristic of PEL is the
capability of reproduce different kinds of load without
expressive power losses, recovering the energy that
would be dissipated if the original load were used.
On this way, researches have been done using
single-phase converter as well three-phase converter,
depending on the PEL purpose. Besides, many types
of control strategy have been developed to reproduce
the original load behavior recovering the power to the
electric network (Li, et al., 2008), (Zheyu, et al.,
2009) and (She, et al., 2009).
This paper presents a new functionality for PEL,
using this to burn-in-test Power Conditioning
prototypes or equipment. These are usually used
connected to the grid as custom power andor FACTS
controllers (Akagi, et al., 2007). Sometimes, they can
attend specific high power loads with non-linear
characteristics, which need support to be according to
the electrical standards. In other words, they should be
able to filtering harmonic currents, regulating the bus
voltage, controlling the power flows, compensating
unbalanced systems at all, depending on its purpose.
In this case, the PEL would be able to reproduce the
high power load behavior. Therefore, if the Power
Conditioning in test is a Harmonic Compensator, for

2.

Electronic Load Conception

Figure 1 illustrates a typical system to burn-in-test
an AC power source. According to the features
required, a PEL should be able to drain a specific
current, recovering the average active power to the
electric network. To make it possible, the recovered
power current (iGPEL) must be a sinusoidal current,
balanced, with unity power factor, phase angle of 180
degrees, and compounds only the fundamental
frequency component.

136

3.

Control Strategy

The presented control strategy is separated in two
independent parts, the Power Recovery and Link dc
Controller and the Load Simulator Controller. The
former is responsible for control the link dc voltage
and, consequently, controls the average active power
flow. The latter is responsible for reproduce the load
behavior. All this information will be better explained
in this section.
3.1

Figure 1 PEL burning-in-test an AC Power Source.

Power Recovery and Link dc Controller

In order to agree with the idea that the electrical
equivalent of the power recovery converter is an ideal
source connected to the electrical network bus, the
power delivered by this converter must contain only
the average active power component, in positive
sequence and fundamental frequency, as assumed
previously. Hence, according to the p-q Theory, this
power will be referenced as p GPEL . Assuming the

The same configuration can be utilized for burnin-test a Power Conditioning. For example, Figure 2
shows a Combined Series and Shunt Power
conditioner under test. In this figure, the PEL is
detailed and separated in three parts the power
recovery converter, the load simulator converter and
the link dc.

back-to-back converter in steady-state, the link dc
voltage is strictly related to the average active power
flow. In other words, regulating the link dc voltage is
the same as achieving the average active power
balance.
For example, if the input power is

pPEL  p PEL + p PEL

(1)

To achieve the power balance in steady-state

pGPEL  p GPEL  p PEL
p  p  p
DC

Figure 2 PEL burning-in-test a Combined Series and
Shunt Power Conditioner.

REF

PEL

(2)
(3)

Where pDC is the link dc power and p REF is the
average active power necessary to obtain the link dc
voltage reference vDCREF . Note that an oscillating

Figure 3 shows the Switching Filter configuration,
which is the same for the power recovery converter
and for the load simulator converter.

input power p PEL will appear in the link dc, producing
an oscillating voltage ( v DC ) added to the continuous
vDCREF , but it cannot be developed by the power
recovery converter. Thus, the vDCREF must be high
sufficiently to avoid that v DC affect the iGPEL
generation.
Figure 4 shows the Power Recovery and Link dc
Controller. As in (Borré, et al., 2006), the link dc
voltage regulation is a simple Proportional and
Integral Controller (PI Controller) that compares
vDCREF with the measured voltage ( vDC ), generating
the input error signal. However, if v DC is present, it is
necessary to filter vDC before set the signal in the PI

Figure 3 Switching Filter configuration.

controller. In this way, only the continuous portion is
controlled, keeping p PEL in link dc.

137

active power flows drained from the PEL bus and
deliver it back to the grid in the source bus.
3.2

In order to set a current (iPEL) that produces an
active and a reactive power from the PEL bus, a Load
Simulator Controller was developed. Furthermore,
with this controller is possible to set specific harmonic
currents in iPEL. Thus, the PEL is able to reproduce
harmonic loads behavior.
Figure 6 shows the Load Simulator Controller
block diagram, where v PEL  and v PEL   are the PEL

Figure 4 Power Recovery and Link dc Controller.

The output PI controller signal is the average
active power ( pGPEL  p GPEL ) that must be
compensated, used in the following equation that
determines the compensation current in 
components (iGPEL-).

iGPEL  
pGPEL
i
 2
2
 GPEL    v ENB  + v ENB  

  v 2ENB  + v 2ENB  

Load Simulator Controller

bus instantaneous voltages of the fundamental
positive-sequence component, in  reference frame.
tPEL is the fundamental phase angle. All this signals
were obtained through a positive sequence detector in
the PEL bus. The amplitude of each line current
(iPEL-a, iPEL-b and iPEL-c) and the fundamental power
factor, or displacement factor, as in (Akagi, et al.,
2007), are set by the user. Note the amplitudes are
composed by all harmonics components and also by
the fundamental negative sequence component (to
simulate
harmonic
and
unbalanced
loads,
respectively). These information are used to generate
the load current signals in  reference frame iPEL-
and iPEL-.
To generate the PWM reference was utilized the
same strategy shown in the Power Recovery and Link
dc PWM generation. The currents iPEL- and iPEL- are
compared with the measured currents iPEL- and iPEL, in  reference frame, and the error signals are used
to input the respective PI Controller (Figure 6). The PI
controller outputs are subtracted from v PEL  and
v PEL   to produce the reference PWM signals.

 v ENB  
v 
 (4)
 ENB   
(5)

Where v ENB and v ENB   are the instantaneous
voltages of the fundamental positive-sequence
component, in  reference frame, obtained through a
positive sequence detector (Neto, et al., 2009 ) and
(Padua, et al., 2007), in the electrical network bus. To
generate the PWM reference, iGPEL- and iGPEL- are
compared with the measured currents iGPEL- and
iGPEL-, in  reference frame, and the error signals
are used to input the respective PI Controller (Figure
5). The PI controller outputs are subtracted from
v ENB and v ENB   to produce the reference PWM
signals.
Once that the Power Recovery and Link dc
Controller is working, it will take over the average

Figure 5 Power Recovery and Link dc PWM generation.

138

Figure 6 Load Simulator Controller and PWM generation.

4.

from Harmonic Load to Unbalanced Harmonic Load
at 1.1 seconds.
Finally, the FFT analysis of the Harmonic Load is
shown in Figure 10 to illustrate that only the harmonic
components required are drained by the PEL.

Simulation Results

To validate the developed control strategy, a
PSCADEMTDC simulation is presented in this
section. The Switching Filter parameters are the same
in both converters L  1 mH, C  25 F and
R  0.3 .
Table 1 shows the load type simulated by the PEL.
It changes through the simulation to reproduce all the
loads behaviors proposed. In addition, each load type
is simulated with three kinds of fundamental power
factor.
Table 1 Simulated Load Type.
Load Type

Balanced

Unbalanced

Harmonic

Unbalanced Harmonic

4.1

Fundamental Power Factor
1
0.8 (inductive)
0.8 (capacitive)
1
0.8 (inductive)
0.8 (capacitive)
1
0.8 (inductive)
0.8 (capacitive)
1
0.8 (inductive)
0.8 (capacitive)

THD
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.07
0.06
0.08
36.26
36.04
36.24
27.92
27.73
27.87

Figure 7 Balanced Load.

Time Simulation
0.2 - 0.3 sec.
0.3 - 0.4 sec.
0.4 - 0.5 sec.
0.5 - 0.6 sec.
0.6 - 0.7 sec.
0.7 - 0.8 sec.
0.8 - 0.9 sec.
0.9 - 1.0 sec.
1.0 - 1.1 sec.
1.1 - 1.2 sec.
1.2 - 1.3 sec.
1.3 - 1.4 sec.

(a)

Load Simulator results

At 0.3 seconds, the fundamental power factor
changes from 1 to 0.8 inductive, as shown in Figure 7.
In Figure 8 the Unbalanced Load current is presented.
To compose this load, there is a fundamental negative
sequence component, whose amplitude is 0.3 p.u. In
the same way, at 0.7 seconds the fundamental power
factor changes from 0.8 inductive to 0.8 capacitive.
As example, the Harmonic Load currents
simulated are composed by 1 p.u. of fundamental
component, 0.3 p.u. of 5th harmonic and 0.2 p.u. of 7th
harmonic. Figure 9 presents these currents changing

(b)
Figure 8 Unbalanced Load (a) Comparison between
Van and iPEL-a (b) Three-phase iPEL.

139

(a)

Figure 12 Power Recovery current.

5.

Based on the simulation results, the PEL proposed
is able to reproduce all load behaviors proposed,
recovering the average active power to the electric
network bus.
The robustness of the Power Recovery and Link
dc Controller was investigated, proving that it
recovers the energy to the electronic network bus with
very good accuracy, as an ideal source, even if p PEL
is drained by the load simulator converter. The link dc
voltage was regulated during all the simulation.
The control strategy developed in the Load
Simulator Controller provides fast dynamic response
to change the load type and can be configured to
reproduce a specific load required, with specific
unbalance andor harmonic components.

(b)
Figure 9 Harmonic and Unbalanced Harmonic Loads
(a) Comparison between Van and iPEL-a (b) Three-phase
iPEL.

Figure 10 FFT analysis of the Harmonic Load.

4.2

Conclusions

References

Power Recovery and Link dc results
Akagi, H., Watanabe, E. H. and Aredes, M. 2007.
Instantaneous Power Theory and Applications to
Power Conditioning. New Jersey  Wiley Inter
Science A John Willey  Sons Inc, IEEE Press
Series on Power Engineering, 2007.
Aredes, M. e Fernandes, R.M. 2009. A unified power
quality conditioner with voltage SAGSWELL
compensation capability. Power Electronics
Conference, 2009. COBEP 09. Brazilian. 27 de
Oct. de 2009, pp. 218 - 224 .
Borré, Antônio Carlos, et al. 2006. Análise
Comparativa entre o Controle Direto e Indireto de
Injeção de Corrente em um D-STATCOM.
Sociedade Brasileira de Eletrônica de Potência.
2006, Vol. 11, pp. 103-110.
Li, F., et al. 2008. Research on AC electronic load
based on back to back single-phase PWM
rectifiers. Applied Power Electronics Conference
and Exposition. APEC 2008, 2008, pp. 630-634.
Neto, Joao A. Moor, et al. 2009 . Robust positivesequence
detector
algorithm.
Industrial
Electronics, 2009. IECON 09. 35th Annual
Conference of IEEE. 3-5 de Nov. de 2009 , pp.
788 - 793 .

Figure 11 shows the Link dc voltage during all the
simulation. The Power Recovery and Link dc
Controller is set at 0.1 seconds. The link dc voltage
reference is vDCREF 560 V. Note that after 0.5 seconds
there is p drained by the PEL. Therefore, after 0.5
PEL

seconds vDC is composed by vDCREF and v DC , but it
not affects the Power Recovery current, as shown in
Figure 12.

Figure 11 Link dc voltage.

140

Padua, M.S., et al. 2007. Comparative analysis of
Synchronization Algorithms based on PLL,
RDFT and Kalman Filter. Industrial Electronics,
2007. ISIE 2007. IEEE International Symposium
on. 4-7 de June de 2007, pp. 964 - 970 .
She, Xu, et al. 2009. Unified power electronic load for
burn-in test. Power Electronics and Motion
Control Conference. IPEMC 09, 2009, pp. 18031807.
Watanabe, E.H., Akagi, H. e Aredes, M. 2008.
Instantaneous
p-q
power
Theory
for
compensating
nonsinusoidal
systems.
Nonsinusoidal Currents and Compensation, 2008.
ISNCC 2008. International School on. 12-13 de
June de 2008, pp. 1 - 10 .
Zheyu, Zhang, et al. 2009. Design and Research of
Three-phase Power Electronic Load. Power
Electronics and Motion Control Conference.
IPEMC 09, 2009, pp. 1798-1802.

141