Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

OPTIMIZATION MODELS FOR RELIABILITY DATA CALIBRATION BASED ON LOAD POINT
INTERRUPTION INDICES
ANSELMO B. RODRIGUES E MARIA G. DA SILVA
Laboratório de Sistemas de Energia Elétrica, Departamento de Engenharia Elétrica,
Universidade Federal do Maranhão
Av. dos Portugueses sn, Campus Universitário do Bacanga, 65080-040, São Luís-MA
E-mails schaum.nyquist@gmail.com, guia@dee.ufma.br
Abstract
 The predictive reliability assessment estimates the future performance of distribution networks, regarding to interruptions of power supply, based on components reliability data and system topology. The indices estimated by predictive models
must match with their respective historical values otherwise the credibility of the model is compromised. An alternative to increase the accuracy of the predictive reliability models is to set reliability components data (failure rates and repair times) so that
the estimated indices are near to their historical values. This process to adjust reliability data is called calibration. In this paper,
nonlinear and quadratic optimization models are proposed to calibrate failure rates and repair times, respectively, of power distribution equipments. Both models are based on the load point reliability indices. The test results in a large scale distribution
networks demonstrate that the proposed models can significantly reduce the mismatches between historical and predicted reliability indices.
Keywords
 calibration, optimization, power distribution, quadratic programming, reliability, condition monitoring.
Resumo
 A avaliação preditiva da confiabilidade de uma rede_de_distribuição tem como objetivo estimar o seu desempenho
futuro, com relação a interrupções no fornecimento de energia, com base nos dados de confiabilidade dos componentes e na topologia da rede. Os índices estimados pelos modelos preditivos devem corresponder aos seus respectivos valores históricos, caso
contrário, a credibilidade do modelo é comprometida. Uma alternativa para aumentar a precisão dos modelos preditivos é ajustar
os dados de confiabilidade dos componentes (taxas de falha e tempos de reparo) tal que os índices estimados sejam próximos
dos seus valores históricos. Este processo de ajuste dos dados de confiabilidade é denominado de calibração. Neste artigo, modelos de otimização quadrática e não-linear são propostos para calibrar as taxas de falha e tempos de reparo, respectivamente, dos
equipamentos de uma rede_de_distribuição. Os dois modelos se baseiam em índices_de_confiabilidade para pontos de carga. Os
resultados dos testes em uma rede distribuição de grande porte demonstraram que os modelos propostos podem reduzir significativamente os erros entre índices_de_confiabilidade históricos e estimados.
Palavras-chave
 .

1

Introduction

The quantitative reliability assessment of distribution networks is associated with the ability of delivering electric energy to the customers in a given
period. This ability is quantified using mainly frequency and duration indices related to energy supply
interruptions (Billinton and Allan 1996 Brown 2009
Chowdhury and Koval 2009). The main indices used
in the power distribution reliability assessment are
(Billinton and Allan 1996 Brown 2009 Chowdhury
and Koval 2009) System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI), System Average Interruption
Duration Index (SAIDI) and Customer Average Interruption Duration Index (CAIDI). In Brazil, the
National Agency of Electric Energy (ANEEL) also
establishes indices for individual customers (ANEEL,
2011). The main reliability indices used in Brazil are
Load Point Interruption Frequency Index (LPIFI) and
Load Point Interruption Duration Index (LPIDI). The
LPIFI and LPIDI indices express the number and the
total duration of interruptions experienced by a customer.
In planning studies, is usually required to carry
out a Predictive Reliability Assessment (PRA) for

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

expansion or reinforcement projects. The PRA estimates reliability indices based on the topology, reliability component data (failure rates and repair times)
and operational procedures (system protection response and restoration procedures) (Billinton and
Allan 1996 Brown 2009 Chowdhury and Koval
2009). The credibility of the generated results using
the PRA is compromised if the estimated indices do
not match with their respective historical values. In
this case, distribution utilities engineers may hesitate
to apply PRA in a planning process. The discrepancies between predicted and historical reliability indices is mainly caused by the lack of reliability data
associated with distribution network equipments, that
is repair times, failure rates and switching times. In
this point, it is important to mention that there are
reliability data available in the technical literature
(Brown 2009). However, the estimated indices with
these data do not reflect the real profile of system
failures.
Although the distribution utilities do not have a
lot of historical data associated with failures of their
equipment, they store historical data on system reliability indices (SAIFI, SAIDI, LPIFI and LPIDI). This
information can be used to calibrate the failure rates
and the repair times of the components so that the

161

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

indices calculated by the PRA model are the closest
one to the historical indices (Brown, 2009).
The majority of the existing methodologies for
reliability data calibration in distribution systems is
based on the system indices SAIFI and SAIDI (Aquino et al. 2004 Brown and Ochoa 2008 Brown
2009). Only Brown et al. (2004) consider load point
indices. However, the method proposed by these authors is not extended to calibrate repair times based
on LPIDI index. In Brazil, the ANEEL (2011) has
established penalties for violations in the target values of the indices LPIFI and LPIDI. In this way, the
main aim of this paper is to introduce two optimization models for calibrating reliability data based on
the load point indices. The failure rates and repair
times are calibrated through the minimization of the
weighted quadratic errors associated with the indices
LPIFI and LPIDI, respectively. Additionally, failure
rate calibration includes equipment condition information using the proposed model by Brown et al.
(2004). The minimization of the LPIFI and LPIDI
errors is carried out through the solution of nonlinear
and quadratic optimization models. The results with a
large scale distribution network in BRAZIL (the
Electricity Utility of Maranhão - CEMAR) demonstrate that the proposed calibration models can obtain
significant reductions in the errors associated with the
load point indices (LPIFI and LPIDI) and match with
the system indices (SAIFI and SAIDI).
2

Predictive Reliability Assessment Model

The PRA estimates the system and load point indices based on two techniques analytical and stochastic simulation (Billinton and Allan 1996 da Silva
et al. 2007 Brown 2009 Chowdhury and Koval
2009). The proposed calibration models in this paper
are based on analytical techniques due to its capacity
to estimate reliability indices with low computational
cost and aceptable precision.
The analytical techniques assess the impact of
each system contingency on the system components
and evaluates the contribution of this contingency for
the reliability indices.
The evaluation of the reliability based on the analytical techniques can be summarized as (Billinton
and Allan 1996 da Silva et al. 2007 Brown 2009
Chowdhury and Koval 2009)
i) Select a contingency.
ii) Simulate the contingency impact.
iii) Add the contingency contribution to the reliability
indices.
iv) If all the contingencies were simulated, then the
algorithm is finished. Otherwise, select a new contingency and return to the step (ii).
The impact of a contingency is determined by
four operational procedures protection system response, upstream restoration, downstream restoration
and repair (Billinton and Allan 1996 da Silva et al.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

2007 Brown 2009 Chowdhury and Koval 2009).
From these operational procedures, it is possible to
estimate the indices SAIFI, SAIDI, LPIFI and LPIDI
as
(1)
LPIFI est  W f  
est
r
rep
sw
s
(2)
LPIDI  W    t + t  W  
T
est
est
tot
(3)
SAIFI  (Nc )  LPIFI
Nc

(
)
 ((Nc )  LPIDI ) Nc

T
est
tot
(4)
SAIDI
Where
LPIFI est ( LPIDI est ) is a vector with dimension equal
to the number of load points ( N load ) that contains the
estimated LPIFI (LPIDI) index of each load point.
W f is a matrix with dimension N load  N comp ( N comp
is the number of components). The elements are
defined as
est

1, if the load point i is interrupted by a failure in

Wij  
component j.
0, otherwise.

f

 is a vector with dimension N comp that contains the
failure rates of each component.
W r is a matrix with the dimension N load  N comp in
which elements are defined as follows
1,


Wijr  

0,

if the restoration time for the load point i is equal to
the repair time of the component j for a failure in
this component.
otherwise.

  diag ( ) is a diagonal matrix whose nonzero
elements are equal to the respective elements in vector 
t rep is a vector with dimension that contains the repair time of each component.
W s is a matrix with dimension which elements are
defined as
1, if the restoration time for the load point i is equal to

Wijs  
the switching time for a failure in the component j.
0, otherwise.


t sw is the switching time
Nc is a vector with dimension N load that contains the
number of customers for each load point.
N load

Nc tot 

 Nc

i

is the total number of customers.

i 1

the upper script T, as in (Nc ) , denotes the transposed of a matrix or vector.
SAIFI est ( SAIDI est ) is the estimated value of the index SAIFI (SAIDI).
The matrix formulation for the reliability indices
presented in the equations is based on the branchzone method described by Chowdhury and Koval
(2009).
T

162

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

3 Calibration Models
3.1 Condition Dependent Failure Rate Model
One of the main tasks in the power distribution
planning is the optimization of the equipments maintenance intervals. This task produces suitable results
if only the maintenance effects on the system reliability and costs are accurately considered. In this way,
it is important to map the equipment condition information to failure rates used by PRA models. In this
paper, condition information is included in the failure
rate calibration considering the three-parameter model proposed by Brown et al. (2004). This model is
described as
k ( xk )  A  k  expB  k  xk + C  k 
(5)

for k  1,K , N comp and  k   
Where
x k is the condition for the component k determined
by the inspection activities.
k (xk ) is the failure rate, as a function of the condition, for the component k.
 is the set of component types, that is  
trunk section, lateral section, secondary network,
transformer, sectionalizing switch, fuse, recloser,
shunt capacitor, voltage regulator.
The notation  k  is used to indicate the equipment
type associated with component k.
A  k  , B  k  and C  k  are the exponential model parameters for a component of type  k  .
3.2 Proposed Models for the Failure Rates Calibration
The main goal of the calibration models proposed in this paper is to adjust failures rates of the components so that the errors between estimated and historical values of the LPIFI are as small as possible.
Furthermore, it is desired that historical and estimated values of the SAIFI index are the same. These
two goals can be accomplished with the calibration of
the failure rates through the following optimization
model
(6)
Minimize (LPIFI )T    LPIFI
subject to
SAIFI est  SAIFI hist
Am  Ammin m  

(7)
(8)

Bm  Bmmin m  

(9)

Am exp( Bm xmmin ) + C m  min
m  
m
Where

(10)

LPIFI  LPIFI est ( A, B, C )  LPIFI hist

A, B, and C are the vectors of parameters for the exponential model associated with the failure rates of
each component type (fuse, transformer, lateral section, etc.). In this way, the dimension of the vectors
A, B, and C are equal to the number of the component
types ( N type ).

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

LPIFI est ( A, B, C )  W f   ( A, B, C ) is the LPIFI vector estimated by PRA model.
 ( A, B, C ) is the failure rate vector for the components
whose
elements
are
given
by
k ( xk )  A  k  expB  k  xk + C  k  with  k    and

k  1,K, N comp
LPIFI hist is the vector of historical values for the
LPIFI indices associated with the load points.
 is a diagonal matrix whose nonzero elements are
given by  ii  Nci Nc tot

(

)

SAIFI est  (Nc )  LPIFI est Nc tot is the historical
value of the SAIFI index.
min
is the minimum value of the failure rate for the
m
component type m.
xmmin  min xk k  1,K , N comp and m   k 
is the



T



minimum value of the conditions, obtained by inspection, for all the components of type m.
Ammin (Bmmin ) is the minimum value of the parameter

Am ( Bm )for the component of type m.
It is important to comment some issues associated with the formulation of the optimization model
(6)-(10)
i) The objective function (6) aims to reduce the
weighted quadratic error between the estimated and
historical values of the LPIFI index for the load
points. The weights in matrix  are defined to give
more relative importance to LPIFI errors in the load
points with the biggest numbers of customers.
ii) ii) The decision variables in the optimization model (6)-(10) are the vectors A, B and C. That is, in the
calibration process the failure rate is adjusted in an
implicit way. Consequently, the maximum dimension
(number of variables) of the optimization model (6)(10) is 3  N type . Due to this, the dimension of the
model (6)-(10) is independent of the system size.
iii) The constraint (7) guarantees that the estimated
value of the SAIFI index is equal to its respective
historical value.
iv) The pair of constraints (8) and (9) ensures that the
failure rate function for each component type is increasing. This feature is very important because the
equipment failure rate must be greater than those of
other equipment of the same type in better conditions.
In this way, derivative of the failure rate, regarding to
condition, for each component must be positive, that
is
d (xk )
 Am Bm expBm xk  > 0
(11)
dxk
for k  1,K , N comp , m   k  and m  
The equation (11) is satisfied if Am > 0 and Bm > 0 .
Consequently, it is necessary to impose positive lower bounds for the elements of the vectors A and B.
v) The constraint (10) implicitly guarantees that the
failure rates of all components are positive. However,
this constraint is imposed only for the component

163

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

with the best condition for each type of equipment.
This modeling is feasible only if the failure rates
functions are increasing. In this case, the failure rate
for the component in the best condition will be lower
than the failure rates of other components of the same
type.
The optimization model (6)-(10) is a nonlinear
programming problem. In this paper, this problem
has been solved using the function fmincon of the
Matlabs Optimization Toolbox (The MathWorks,
2008).
A simpler model for the failure rates calibration
can be obtained considering as follow
i) The parameters vectors A and B of the exponential
model are fixed in typical positive values. The typical
positive values of the parameters A and B of the exponential model can be found in Table III presented
by Brown et al. (2004).
ii) Only the vector C is adjusted in the exponential
model to match the historical and estimated values of
the SAIFI index.
iii) The objective function (6) is ignored and the constraints (8)-(10) are relaxed.
From the assumptions (i)-(iii), the failure rate
calibration is then associated with the following linear system
(12)
Aeqf C  b eqf
Where
T
beqf  SAIFI hist  ( Nc ) W f AB

 AB is a vector whose elements are given by
kAB (xk )  A0 exp B 0 xk for for k  1,K , N comp e
k 



 k 



  k    .
A0 and B0 are vectors associated with the typical values of the parameters A and B.
T
Aeqf  (Nc ) W eqf
W eqf is a matrix with dimension N load  N type which
elements are given by
Weqf

Lk  Wkf m  
m



k m

 m is the set of components of type m.
Lk is the length of the component k (in miles) if this
component is a main or lateral section. Otherwise, Lk
is equal to one.
Weqf
and Wkf are the columns m and k of the matrim
ces W eqf and W f , respectively.
The equation (12) is undetermined because the
number of variables ( N type ) is greater than the number of equations (one). In this way, the vector C can
be determined using a minimum norm solution of
(12) analogously to the calibration model proposed
by Aquino at al. (2004). The minimum norm method
solves an underdetermined system through the following optimization problem (Monticelli, 1999)
2

Minimize C  C T C

(13)

Aeqf C  b eqf

(14)

Subject to

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Where, the notation  indicates the Euclidian norm
of a vector.
The optimal solution for the optimization problem
(14)-(15) is given by
Aeqf b eqf
Cm  1m eqf 2 m  
(15)
(A )



1m

m

It is important to comment some issues associated with the failure rate calibration using the minimum
norm method
i) The typical values of the parameters A and B of the
exponential model can be found in Table III in reference 8.
ii) The typical values of the parameters A and B
showed in 8 are positive, that is, they result in increasing failure rates functions. Consequently, the
coherency of the model regarding to maintenance
activities is preserved.
iii) Only the shifting parameter C of the failure model
is adjusted.
iv) The optimization model (13)-(14) only assures
that the estimated and historical values of the SAIFI
index are the same, that is, the errors between the
estimated and historical values of the LPIFI are not
considered.
In fact, the failure rate calibration with the minimum norm method is not based on the load point
reliability. It has a negligible computational cost
compared to the nonlinear optimization model (6)(10). This advantage is due to the fact that the vector
C is directly determined by the analytical expression
defined in (15). In this way, the minimum norm
method may be an attractive alternative for the failure
rate calibration based on the condition information.
Additionally, the calibration based on the feeder
parameters can increase the quality of the results produced by the calibration models proposed in this paper. Due to this, two versions of the proposed calibration models have been considered in the results presented in section IV
i) all the system components of the same type have
identical failure rate functions and repair times.
ii) the components of the same feeder and same type
have identical failure rates functions and repair times.
3.3 Proposed Models for the repair Times Calibration
As well as in the calibration of the failure rates,
the calibration of repair times aims to reduce the errors between estimated and historical reliability indices for the load points. Nevertheless, the load point
index used in the repair time calibration is the LPIDI.
Furthermore, it is desirable that the expected value of
the SAIDI index must match with its historical value.
These two goals can be addressed if the repair time
calibration is carried out through the solution of the
following optimization problem
T
(17)
Minimize f  LPIDI  LPIDI 
Subject to

164

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

SAIDI est  SAIDI med
 mrep   mmin m  

(18)
(19)

Where
LPIDI  LPIDI est  LPIDI hist
LPIDI hist is the vector of the historical values for the
LPIDI index.
LPIDI est  W eqr  rep + LPIDI sw
LPIDI sw  t sw  W s   is the LPIDI component associated with the switching times.
* is the vector of calibrated failure rates which elements are given by
k ( xk )  A exp B  xk + C 



k 

 k 





k m

Weqr
and Wrk are the m and k columns of the matrim
ces W eqr and W r , respectively.
 rep is a vector with dimension N type that stores the
repair time for each type of component.
T
SAIDI est  (Nc )  LPIDI est Nc tot

)

hist

SAIDI is the historical value of the SAIDI index.
 min is the lower bound vector for the repair times of
each component type.
It is possible to express the objective function (17)
and the constraint (18) as explicit functions of  rep
remembering
that LPIDI est  W eqr  rep + LPIDI sw .
The optimization model (17)-(19) can be rewritten
as
1
T
(20)
Minimize f  ( rep ) H rep + c T  rep + f 0
2
Subject to
(21)
Aeqr  b eqr
rep
min
m m
m  
(22)
Where
T
H  2(W eqr ) W eqr

c  2(W eqr ) LPIDI rep
T

f 0  (LPIDI rep ) LPIDI rep
T

LPIDI rep  LPIDI hist  LPIDI sw
T
SAIDI sw  (1 Nc tot )(Nc ) LPIDI sw
Aeqr  (1 Nc tot )(Nc ) W eqr
T

b eqr  SAIDI hist  SAIDI sw
The switching time t sw is fixed in the repair time
calibration. Due to this, the following variables are
constants in the optimization model (20)-(22) H,
c, f 0 , Aeq and b eq . Consequently, the optimization
model (20)-(22) is a quadratic programming problem.
In this paper, the quadratic optimization problem
associated with the repair time calibration was solved

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5



1m

m

4 Tests Results

 k 

Am , Bm and Cm for m   are the calibrated parameters of the exponential model for the failure rate
using the optimization model (6)-(10) or (14)-(15).
W eq is a matrix with dimension N load  N type which
elements are given by
Weqr

k ( x k )  Wrk m  
m

(

using the function quadprog of the Matlabs Optimization Toolbox (The MathWorks, 2008).
Analogously to the failure rate calibration, it is
possible to calibrate the repair time using a minimum
norm method. This model is obtained by relaxing the
objective function (20) and the constraint (22). Consequently, the calibrated repair times are given by
Aeqr b eqr
 mrep  1m eqr 2 for m  
(23)
(A )

4.1 Test System Characteristics
The proposed calibration models have been tested in the 13.8 kV distribution network supplied by
the Renascença substation belonging to CEMAR
utility, in Brazil. The one line diagram in GIS coordinates for the distribution network is showed in Figure 1.
In practice, the historical reliability indices must
be obtained from the supply interruptions data available in the distribution utilities Outage Management
System (OMS). However, the authors do not have
direct access to CEMAR OMS. Due to this, the calibration models were tested using simulated historical
averages for the reliability indices. In the Renascença
substation, these simulated historical indices were
obtained with the PRA model described in section II
subject to the following conditions
i) the switching time is  hour.
ii) the failure rates and the repair times of the component types are equals to their respective high values
presented in Table 4.1 of the Browns book (Brown,
2009).
Furthermore, the equipment conditions are randomly sampled using a uniform probability distribution. A similar procedure was used in the tests with
the calibration model proposed by Brown et al.
(2004).
The calibration models proposed in this paper require
the specified lower bounds for the following variables parameters A and B of the exponential model,
repair times and failures rates. Additionally, the
MATLAB function fmincon demands a starting point
for the solution of nonlinear optimization problems.
This data are specified as
i) the initial values for the repair times are equals to
the typical values, presented in Table 4.1 of the
Browns book (Brown, 2009).
ii) the lower bounds for the vectors A and B are
equals to their respective typical values showed by
Brown et al. (2004) in Table III 8.
iii) the typical values of the parameters A, B and C
delivered by Brown et al. (2004) in Table III are used
as starting point for the MATLAB function fmincon.
iv) the lower bounds of the failure rates are equals to
their respective best condition values ( k (xk  0) )

165

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

presented by Brown et al. (2004) in Table III.
v) the lower bounds for the repair times are equals to
the switching time (0.5 hours) once the restoration
time is feasible if only the time to fix a faulty equipment is greater than the restoration time.

Figure 1. GIS one line diagram of the Renascença distribution
network, where the gray square indicates the substation.

4.2 Failure Rate Calibration
In general it is desirable to calibrate the parameters of all components types. However, this strategy
can cause unnecessary adjustments in some parameters of the model. In this way, a sensitivity study was
carried out to identify the most suitable components
types for the calibration. From this study, the failure
rate calibration was carried out considering the adjustment of the exponential model parameters (A, B
and C) in the following types of components fuses,
trunk sections, lateral sections and transformers.
Consequently, the optimization problem (6)-(10)
associated with the failure rate calibration has the
following dimensions
i) system level 5  3  15
ii) feeder level 8  5  3  120.
Five models were compared in the failure rate
calibration
i) Minimum quadratic deviation (optimization model
(6)-(10)) with system-oriented parameters adjustment. This model was solved using the SQP algorithm available in fmincon.
ii) Minimum quadratic deviation with feeder-oriented
parameters adjustment
iii) Minimum norm (optimization model (14)-(15))
with system-oriented parameters adjustment
iv) Minimum norm with feeder-oriented parameters
adjustment
v) Minimization of the Chi-Square error associated
with the LPIFI histogram proposed by Brown et al.
(2004).
The Chi-Square error was minimized considering
lower bounds for the parameters A and B. This procedure guarantees that the failure rate functions are
growing. The Chi-Square error is a non-differentiable
function due to the discrete nature of the histogram.
ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

In this way, it was minimized using the Particle
Swarm Optimization algorithm available in PSwarm
program developed by Vaz and Vicente (2007).
Initially, the failure rate calibration models are
compared regarding to SAIFI index. The historical
and initial values of the SAIFI index are 3.9095
int.year and 1.5383 int.year, respectively. The initial
value was obtained with the starting point delivered
for the optimization algorithms. The calibration models based on minimum deviation and minimum norm
achieved an exact match between the calibrated and
historical values of the SAIFI index. That is, these
calibrations models eliminate an error of 60.6536
between the historical and initial SAIFI values. However, the SAFI index estimated by 2 model is 4.1322
int.year. The error associated with the 2 model is
due to lack of equality constraints to ensure that the
historical and calibrated values of the SAIFI index
are the same. It is important to mention that the
Pswarm algorithm cannot achieve a solution for the
2 model with parameter adjustment for each feeder.
This convergence problem may be caused by the sensitivity loss due to class gaps in the LPIFI histogram.
These gaps are originated by the large variation in the
LPIFI indices. In turn, these variations are caused by
the presence of feeders with heterogeneous
characteristics among themselves. For example, For
example, the total length of each one ranges from
3.4667 km to 24.4319 km.
A quantitative assessment of the errors between
historical and calibrated LPIFI indices is presented in
Table 1. The values in this table demonstrate that the
calibration models based on the minimum quadratic
deviation are more suitable for the failure rate calibration. This table also shows that the errors associated with the minimum norm model, considering system-oriented parameter adjustment, are comparable
with those obtained using the minimum quadratic
deviation. That is, the minimum norm model can be a
low cost alternative for the failure rate calibration
since the estimation of the C parameter of the exponential model is based on a simple analytical formula
(equation (16)). Furthermore, it is important to mention that all the failure rates calibrated by the minimum norm method are positive. In other words, the
minimum norm solution is feasible.
Tabela 1. Error Statistics for the Calibrated LPIFI Indices.
Model or Source
Initial (uncalibrated)
Min. 2SwarmSystem
Min. Dev.FeederSQP
Min.
Dev.SystemSQP
Min. NormSystem
Min. NormFeeder

Error Statistics ()
Min.
Mean
Max.
52.80
61.05
67.05
0.01
22.59
98.07
0.82
5.62
4.9010-4
0.19
7.38
14.80
0.02
0.72

9.34
26.26

31.89
61.01

In the failure rate calibration, it is important to
assess the goodness of fit between the calibrated and
historical histograms associated with the LPIFI index.

166

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

The Figures 2, 3 and 4 show the LPIFI histograms
obtained by using the following methods minimum
deviation with feeder-oriented adjustment, minimum
norm and minimization of the 2 statistics, respectively. These Figures show that the historical histogram is
more fitted to the calibrated histograms by the minimum norm and minimum deviation models. This
result is due to the presence of gaps between the bins
of the LPIFI histogram.
4.3 Repair Times Calibration
In this subsection are presented the results obtained with the models for the repair time calibration,
that is minimum norm and quadratic programming.
The minimum deviation model with feeder-oriented
parameter adjustment was the best algorithm in the
failure rate calibration. In this way, the calibrated
failures delivered by this model are used in the repair
time calibration to obtain the quadratic programming
and minimum norm models. Due to this, the repair
times are calibrated with feeder-oriented parameter
adjustment.
Initially, the repair times calibration models are
compared using the SAIDI index as reference. The
historical and initial values of the SAIDI index are
1.8658 hoursyear and 8.6196 hoursyear, respectively. The initial (uncalibrated) value of the SAIDI index is obtained with the initial values of the failure
rates and repair times. The SAIDI index calibrated by
the minimum norm and quadratic programming models are equal to the historical value of the SAIDI index. These models have eliminated the error of
78.35 associated with the SAIDI index. However,
the solution obtained by the minimum norm method
is unfeasible. In other words, there are repair times
which values are lower than the switching time (0.5
hours). For example, the fuses calibrated repair times
in feeder 4 are equal to 0.0171 hours.

Figure 2. LPIFI histogram calibrated by the minimum deviation.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Figure. 3. LPIFI histogram calibrated by the minimum norm.

Figure 4. LPIFI histogram calibrated by the 2.

The calibration models proposed in this paper
are based on the load point indices. Therefore, one
must assess the accuracy of the calibrated repair
times regarding to the LPIDI index. The Figure 5
shows the histograms associated with the historical,
initial and calibrated values of the LPIDI indices.
From this figure, it can be noticed that the shape of
the histogram associated with the uncalibrated LPIDI
indices is very different from those associated with
the historical values. On the other hand, this figure
shows that the calibration model for the repair times
considerably improves the goodness of fit of the estimated LPIDI indices regarding to their respective
historical values.
Finally, the Table 2 presents a quantitative assessment of the accuracy of the quadratic programming model based on the relative errors of the initial
and calibrated values of the LPIDI indices related
with their respective historical values.
From Table 2, it can be noticed that the quadratic programming algorithm caused a reduction of
82.24  in the mean relative error associated with the
LPIDI indices for the load points. This result demonstrates that the quadratic programming model can

167

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

calibrate the repair times with good accuracy and low
computational costs.

Figure. 5. LPIDI histogram calibrated by quadratic programming
model.

Table 2. Statistics Error Obtained with Quadratic Programming
Model.
Error ()
Minimum
Mean
Maximum

Initial
66.3005
78.9927
90.2859

Calibrated
0.0301
14.0291
62.0276

5 Conclusions
This paper presents a nonlinear and quadratic
optimization models to calibrate the failure rates and
repair times, respectively, of the power distribution
network equipments. The two models are oriented to
load point reliability indices. A minimum norm model was introduced for the calibration of failure rates.
The proposed models were compared with the 2
minimization model presented by Brown et al. (2004)
in a 13.8 kV distribution network with 4896 components. The results demonstrated that
i) the best model for the failure rate calibration is the
minimum quadratic deviation with feeder-oriented
parameter adjustment
ii) the minimum norm model can calibrate the failure
rates with low computational costs and acceptable
precision
iii) the quadratic optimization model achieves a good
matching between historical and estimated LPIDI
indices in the repair times calibration.

Aquino, N. S., Rodrigues, A. B. and da Silva, M. G.
(2004) Reliability Assessment of Radial
Distribution Networks Parameters Calibration
and Uncertainties Estimation In XV Congresso
Brasileiro de Automática, 2004, Gramado
Brazil.
Billinton, R. and Allan, R. N. (1996). Reliability
Evaluation of Power Systems. Plenum Press,
New York.
Brown, R. E. and Ochoa, J. R. (1998) Distribution
System Reliability Default Data and Model
Validation.
IEEE
Transactions
Power
Systems, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 704-709.
Brown, R. E., Frimpong, G. and Willis, H. L. (2004)
Failure Rate Modeling Using Equipment
Inspection Data. IEEE Transactions Power
Systems, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 782-787.
Brown, R. E. (2009). Electric Power Distribution
Reliability. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Chowdhury, A. A. and Koval, D. A. (2009). Power
Distribution System Reliability. Wiley,
Hoboken.
da Silva, M. G., Rodrigues, A. B., de Castro, C. L.
C., Coelho, A., Moutinho, E. A., Aquino, N. S.
and Cavalcante, A. B. (2007) An Application of
Predictive Reliability Analysis Techniques in
Brazils Northeast Distribution Network.
International Journal in Electrical Power and
Energy Systems. Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 155-162.
Monticelli, A. J. (1999) State Estimation in Electric
Power Systems.Springer, New York.
The MathWorks (2008) Optimization Toolbox 4
Userss Guide. Internet, Available from
httpwww.mathworks.com Accessed 01 March
2012.
Vaz, A. I. F. and Vicente, L. N. (2007) A particle
swarm pattern search method for bound
constrained global optimization. Journal of
Global Optimization. vol. 39, No. 2, pp. 197219.

Bibliographical References
ANEEL (2011) Procedimentos de Distribuição de
Energia Elétrica no Sistema Elétrico Nacional
PRODIST  Módulo Qualidade de Energia
Internet,
Available
from
Elétrica
<httpwww.aneel.gov.br> Accessed 01 March
2012.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

168