XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

ESOPHAGEAL PH WIRELESS MONITORING SYSTEM
PATRICIA M. C. PAULA1, SUELIA S. F. R. ROSA2, ADSON F. ROCHA1,2
1

Electrical Engineering Department, Universidade de Brasilia, Campus Universitário Darcy Ribeiro, Asa
Norte, 70919-970, Brasilia,DF,BRAZIL
2
Engeneering  Inovation Laboratory, Electrical Engineering Department, Universidade de Brasilia,
Campus Gama, Setor Central, 72405-610, Gama, DF,BRAZIL
E-mails patricia.enge@gmail.com, suelia@unb.br, adson@unb.br

Abstract - This paper reports the instrumentation of a cylindrical balloon shape device for a wireless sensor data acquisition system
that can be used in diagnosing abnormalities in the esophagus. The proposed system is a battery-operated and microprocessor-based
device that measures pH from one pair of pH electrodes incorporated in a balloon positioned in the esophagus, stores the data in its
flash memory, and transfers the data to a target board connected to the USB port of a PC computer at the end of a recording period.
A program on the PC then analyze the data and identify the reflux events, categorizing them according to specific parameters based
on DeMeester and Johnson scoring system for intra-esophageal pH measurements. The program displays the pH waveform on a PC
and allows visual inspection of the entire recordings. Repeatability of the obtained voltage measurements related to pH was tested.
Experimental results showed that the balloon device instrumented is suitable for monitoring intraluminal gastro-esophageal pH to
detect reflux disease. However, clinical trials are required to confirm the validity of the laboratory tests.
Keywords - Data acquisition, pH sensor, gastro-esophageal reflux, wireless system, instrumentation and biomedical engineering.
Resumo - Este artigo relata a instrumentação de um módulo em forma de balão cilíndrico para um sistema_wireless de aquisição de
dados que pode ser utilizado no diagnóstico de anormalidades no esôfago. O sistema proposto é operado  bateria e baseado em
microprocessador, para medir pH a partir de um par de eletrodos de pH incorporados em um balão posicionado no esôfago,
armazenar os dados em memória flash, e transferir os dados a uma placa receptora conectada a porta USB de um computador
pessoal ao final do período de gravação. Um programa no computador, então, analisa os dados e identifica os eventos de refluxo
classificando-os conforme parâmetros específicos baseados no sistema de pontuação de DeMeester e Johnson para medidas de pH
intra-esofágico. O programa mostra na tela do computador a forma de onda do pH permitindo inspeção_visual de toda a gravação.
Foi testada a repetibilidade das medidas de tensão obtidas relacionadas ao pH. Resultados experimentais mostraram que o módulo
instrumentado é adequado para monitorar o pH gastro-esofágico intraluminal para detectar a doença do refluxo. No entanto, testes
clínicos são necessários para confirmar a validade dos testes de laboratório.
Palavras-chave .

1

Introduction
presently, three different transducers are used
for esophageal pH-metry (1) combined glass
electrodes
(2)
polycrystalline
and
monocrystalline antimony electrodes and (3)
field-effect transistor electrodes.
Combined glass electrodes have the
advantages of (1) long operational life (2)
relatively linear characteristics (3) rapid
response and (4) small recording drift.
However, combined glass electrodes are
expensive and bulky, which makes it difficult to
pass them transnasally or to tolerate them inside
the esophagus for more than a few hours.
Antimony electrodes are smaller than the
combined glass electrodes, but normally require
an additional reference electrode. Low price,
low response time and good flexibility are
among the advantages of these electrodes. On
the other hand, operational life of less than 10
studies and reduced response accuracy are their
major drawbacks.

Many patients who report intermittent
recurrence of severe angina-like chest pain test
negative on standard cardiac evaluations such as
exercise ECG and thallium scanning. In light of
reports of an association between chest pain and
esophageal motility disorders such as gastroesophageal reflux disease, the esophagus is
suspected as being the source of pain in many
such cases as described by Pfister et al. (1989).
Esophagus abnormalities are caused by
motility disorder and heartburn, where acid
washes up into the esophagus repeatedly and
irritates the lining of the esophagus, extracted
from Arshak et al. (2007). In order to diagnose
these disorders, esophageal manometry is
utilized to measure the mechanical movement of
the esophageal sphincters and the esophageal
wall.
On the other hand, to diagnose heartburn is
used the pH-metry to monitor the gastroesophageal reflux analysing the pH changes
recorded. Gonzalez et al. (2006) discussed that

2204

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

The objective of this research is to describe
the development of an instrumentation based on
wireless system to monitor esophageal pH while
using a CFE module to treat obesity. It
consists of a pair of pH electrodes, connected to
an operational amplifier, a low pass filter, a
voltage limit circuit to protect the ADC
converter used, a microcontroller and a
transceiver hardwaresoftware based on a
National Instruments wireless tool, placed
inside a CFE module. This instrumentation is
intended to data acquisition and transmission to
a laptop running a program to display the data to
a final user.

connected to the extremities of the batteries
(+6V) with the aim to provide 3.3V to the
Wireless Development Tool. The pair of pH
electrodes was connected to a double stage
amplifier circuit with a shunt voltage reference
for addition of offset voltage.
The signal from a pH probe has a typical
resistance between 10 M and 1000 M. Due
to this high value, it is very important that the
amplifier input currents be as small as possible.
For these reasons, the operational amplifier
LMC6035 with less than 2 fA input current was
chosen for the stage of ion detection in this
application. The theoretical output of the
standard antimony and AgAgCl pH probe is
59.16 mVpH at 25C with 0V output at a pH of
7. It is chemically described by the Nernst
equation (equation 1), where the E is the total
potential read from the pH probe and E is the
electrodes reduction potential.

2 Methods
2.1 Esophageal pH sensors
Gastric juice is mainly formed by
hydrochloric acid which contains hydrogen
ions. The occurrence of reflux of the stomachs
liquid contents into the esophagus changes the
concentration of hydrogen ions in the
intraluminal esophageal solution. The difference
of the electrical potential between the pair of
electrodes, consequently, changes.
The pH sensing system reads the
intraluminal esophageal pH changes during a
time for analysis and determination of gastroesophageal reflux diseases. This design uses an
monocrystalline antimony (Sb) as a sensing
electrode and a silversilver chloride (AgAgCl)
electrode as internal reference (Alacer
Biomedica) yielding a pH range of 1 to 7 pH
units.

E  E  (0,05916 x pH)

(1)

The gain of the first stage of LMC6035
amplified the probe output providing a scaled
voltage of 76 mVpH. The second amplification
stage of the micro power operational amplifier
LMC6035 provided phase inversion so that the
output is directly proportional to pH, over the
full range of the probe. In the non-inverting
input of the second stage amplifier was placed
an AD1580 shunt voltage reference ensuring a
stable offset voltage of 1,225V.
Between the non-inverting input of the first
stage and the inverting input of the second stage
was placed a low pass filter with 1 Hz cutoff
frequency to avoid interferences in the output
signal.
The output of the second amplification
stage was connected to a voltage limit circuit
based on a resistor and a Zener diode in series
aiming to protect the ADC converter contained
in the MSP-430 microcontroller. Total current
consumption was about 1 mA for the whole
system.

2.2 Analog signal-conditioning circuitry
The circuit was supplied by two lithium
button cells of 3V each (Maxell CR1216)
replacing the original two AAA batteries
provided in the Wireless Development Tool EZ430-RF2500 to reduce space and weight.
The battery cells were connected in series
having the positive terminal of one cell
connected to the negative terminal of another
cell. This had the effect of increasing the overall
voltage (+6V) when considering the negative
terminal as reference and the effect of providing
dual-supply (+3V and -3V) when considering
the cells connection point as reference. It was
obtained a symmetric power supply, as the two
batteries were equally charged.

2.3 RF Networking with the MSP430 Wireless
Development Tool - EZ430-RF2500
The analog signal-conditioning circuitry
developed for the parameter was connected to
the electrodes (J2) and to the ADC analog input
(J3) of the microcontroller MSP430F2274. The
data acquisition circuit is shown in the Figure 1.

The operational amplifier was supplied with
symmetric voltage supply (-3V and +3V). In
addition, a voltage regulator LM3940IMP was

2205

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

be placed within the esophagus - three
centimeters below the upper esophageal
sphincter (UES) - to reduce its effective radius,
thus reducing the flow and speed which the food
can be consumed for weight loss aiding in the
obesity treatment.
The pair of pH electrodes was fixed in the
distal extremity of the module approximately
ten centimeters distant of the lower esophageal
sphincter (LES) and the battery-powered target
board was placed in the internal tube as shown
in Figure 2.
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the data
acquisition circuitry.
The eZ430-RF2500 is a complete wireless
development tool providing all the hardware
and software to evaluate the MSP430F2274
microcontroller and CC2500 2.4-GHz wireless
transceiver.
The microcontroller MSP430F2274M is an
ultralow-power mixed signal microcontroller
with two built-in 16-bit timers, a universal serial
communication interface, 10-bit AD converter
with integrated reference and data transfer
controller (DTC), ultralow-power consumption
(0.1uA for RAM Retention and 0.8uA for real
time clock) and 32KB + 256B Flash Memory,
and 1KB RAM.
The tool consists of two parts one is eZ430RF USB-powered debugging interface and
another eZ430-RF2500T target board has a
battery-powered expansion board and two AAA
batteries (1.5V each). The voltage supply (J3) of
the target board described was modified per two
3V lithium button cells (Maxell CR1216)
attached previously at the analog signalconditioning circuitry using a battery cell holder
(501 Keystone) (J1).
The eZ430-RF2500T target board was
designed to be used as a remote terminal unit
(RTU) with the conditioning circuit of pH
attached on the analog input (A0) of the ADC
converter of the MSP430 microcontroller. The
USB debugging interface eZ430-RF2500 was
connected to a PC consisting in a supervisory
system to receive and, therefore, display the
data to the final user.

Figure 2. Illustration of the proposed acquisition
system inside the module.
2.5 Experimental setup
The pH measurement system using
antimony electrode needs a two point
calibration procedure. For the calibration, the
pair of pH electrodes was submerged in buffer
solutions provided by the Alacer Biomedica
laboratory with pH 1.2 and pH 6.8. After each
reading, the electrodes were cleaned with water
and dried.
After the calibration procedure being
evaluated, the module was introduced to a glass
tube with different pH unknown solutions and
the measurements made was compared with the
measurement made by a commercial pHmeter
(PHTEK, pH-100) in order to test feasibility.
Moreover, one set of 30 independent
measurements were taken at 25C for each
buffer solutions of known pH value in order to
test the electrodes repeatability.

3 Results
Testing the feasibility of the pH
measurement system using unknown pH
solutions indicated that it has a performance
similar to a commercial pHmeter (PHTEK, pH100). The pair of electrodes accurately senses
pH within the physiological range (pH 1-7),
which is important for adequately diagnosing
gastro-esophageal reflux.
In the repeatability test of pH
measurements were performed 30 immersions,
each one during six seconds for the electrodes
(Sb and AgAgCl) stabilize the measurement, to
evaluate the response of the electrodes in

2.4 Module design
All these features were placed inside a
CFE module. It is made by latex (natural
rubber) with eight centimeters of length, two
and one half centimeters of external tube
diameter and one centimeter of internal tube
diameter in a cylindrical balloon shape. The
device was developed by Rodrigues (2009) to

2206

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

contact with buffer solutions of pH 1 and 7.
This test showed that the values measured in the
two buffer solutions used were closed to the
theoretical values, Table 1, having good
stability over several hours and a 90 response
time of less than 10 seconds.
Table 1  Repeatability test.
pH 1
- 108
- 112
- 113
- 114
- 114
- 114
- 113
- 114
- 112
- 112
- 112
- 113
- 113
- 112
- 111

pH 7
- 398
- 398
- 399
- 400
- 401
- 402
- 402
- 403
- 402
- 404
- 403
- 405
- 403
- 403
- 403

pH 1
- 111
- 111
- 112
- 111
- 111
- 110
- 111
- 110
- 110
- 111
- 112
- 111
- 111
- 111
- 111

pH 7
- 405
- 406
- 404
- 404
- 404
- 404
- 405
- 405
- 403
- 405
- 405
- 405
- 404
- 405
- 405

Figure 3. Output responses of the pH measurement system
shown as a graph of E (electrical potential) versus pH.

4 Discussions
A prototype wireless pH monitoring system
has been designed using integrated circuits,
wireless communication, and physiological
miniaturized electrodes, with lightweight, ultralow power and intelligent monitoring devices.
The developed system performs the pH
measurement and transmission to a receptor
device connected to a computer for analysis of
the acquired data and to provide the data
visualization for a clinician.
The experimental results demonstrated the
feasibility of the proposed design when
comparing it to a commercial pHmeter. As
demonstrated by the repeatability test, the
proposed design was able to discriminate
different ionic concentrations associated to
intra-esophageal pH and reflux values with
stability. The relationship between ionic
concentration and pH was linear and similar to
the description of the Nernst equation.
The proposed design overcomes the
disadvantages of the current technologies in
clinical use for esophageal studies and enhances
the utility of the recently proposed CFE
module.

This experiment showed that the pair of
electrodes has fast response to changes in pH,
being developed fairly constant potential and
with reproducibility of approximately +- 6 mV.
Its quick response to changes in pH suggests
that this pair of electrodes is shown applicable
for measurements of physiological pH.
In the present study, we noticed that the
electrodes had an amplified slope of 63 mVpH
and non-amplified slope from 47 mVpH to 
49.5 mVpH, which is close to the theoretical
value ( 59.16 mVpH at 25 C).
Although some investigators have reported
that antimony electrodes do not exhibit
continuous linearity throughout the pH scale,
several other studies and our own have
confirmed that the response is linear in the
physiological range. Figure 3 shows the output
performance of the measurement system
through the graph of E (the total electrical
potential read from the pH probe) versus the pH
in the physiological range, where series 2
represents the electrical potential in the input of
the analog signal-conditioning circuit and series
1 represents its output.

5 Conclusions
These trials indicate that the basic
construction and performance of the pH data
acquisition circuitry used in the present
invention make them potentially suitable for in
vivo use for measurement of esophageal pH.
The response of the antimony electrode to pH
alteration was linear in the physiological range.
An advantage of the antimony electrodes
used in the present invention is the degree of
miniaturization which is possible. Another

2207

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

scoring system. J. Clin. Gastroenterol., vol.
8, pp. 52-58.
Pfister, C.J. Harrison, M. A. Hamilton, J.W.
Tompkins, W.J. Webster, J.G. (1989).
Development Of A Three Channel, 24 H
Ambulatory Esophageal Pressure Monitor.
IEEE
Transactions
On
Biomedical
Engineering, (), 487-490.
Arshak, K. Jafer, E. (2007). Modeling of
wireless based sensors data acquisition
systems used for esophagus monitoring.
Sens.
Actuators
A
Phys.,
doi
10.1016j.sna.2007.05.012.
Gonzalez, J.L. Sadowski, D.C. Yadid-Pecht,
O. Kaler, K.V.I.S. Mintchev, M.P.
(2006). Multichannel pressure, bolus
transit, and pH esophageal catheter. IEEE
Sensors, 6(3)796  803.
Rodrigues, S.S.F.R. (2009). Desenvolvimento
de um sistema_de_controle_de_fluxo
esofagiano para tratamento da obesidade. 1.
ed. São Paulo Edgard Blcher Ltda, v. 1.
pp.121.

major advantage is that they can be sterilized
and reused as many as ten times.
In summary, our studies suggest that the pH
wireless monitoring system using antimony
electrodes provided accurate determination of
intra-esophageal pH.
Acknowledgment
The authors wish to express their gratitude
to Alacer Biomédica for the antimony
electrodes fabrication and for the electrodes and
buffer solutions provided as samples to make
possible the development of this system.
References
Johnson, L.F. DeMeester, T.R. (1986).
Development
of
the
24-Hours
intraesophageal pH monitoring composite

2208