XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

SMART GRID RECONFIGURATION APPLIED TO A CASE STUDY
Fabio Ricardo Oliveira Bento, Wanderley Cardoso Celeste


Estrada da Tartaruga
CEP 29215-090
Guarapari, ES, Brasil



Rodovia BR 101 Norte Km 60
CEP 29932-540
Sao Mateus, ES, Brasil

Emails fabio.obento@gmail.com, wanderley.celeste@ufes.br
Abstract In this work, it is presented a methodology for the reconfiguration of smart_grids that is applied
to a smart_grid formed by two microgrids that can be electrically interconnected in contingency situations. Each
microgrid is also connected to an Electric Power System (EPS) when operating in the normal state. Moreover,
the smart_grid includes energy storage devices (batteries) located at strategic points. Serious faults that isolated
the microgrids of the EPS and, moreover, considerably reduced the generation capacity of such microgrids
were simulated. The proposed methodology was applied to reconfiguration in scenarios involving cooperation
between microgrids andor the use of energy storage devices. Performance indices were also proposed to enable
a quantitative analysis for each scenario. It was shown that intelligent cooperation between microgrids andor
the smart-use storage energy reduced the impacts of the contingency scenarios.
Keywords

Smart_grids, Microgrids, Grid reconfiguration, Computational intelligence, Genetic algorithm.

Resumo Neste trabalho , apresenta-se uma metodologia para a reconfiguracao de redes_inteligentes que
e aplicada a uma rede_inteligente formada por duas microrredes que podem ser eletricamente interligadas em
situacoes de contingencia . Cada microrrede tambem esta conectada a um sistema de energia eletrica (SEP)
quando operando no estado normal. Alem disso, a rede_inteligente inclui dispositivos de armazenamento de
energia (baterias) localizados em pontos estrategicos. Falhas graves que isolam as microrredes do SEP e, alem
disso, reduzem consideravelmente a capacidade de geracao de tais microrredes foram tambem simuladas . A
metodologia proposta foi aplicada em cenarios que envolvem a cooperacao entre microrredes eou o uso de
dispositivos de armazenamento_de_energia . Tambem foram propostos ndices de desempenho para permitir uma
analise quantitativa para cada cenario . Mostrou-se que a cooperacao inteligente entre microrredes eou a energia
de armazenamento de uso inteligente reduziu os impactos dos cenarios de contingencia.
Palavras-chave 

1

Introduction

Microgrids, in turn, are electric power networks
with several consumer units (loads) and several strategically distributed low-power generators. Both loads and generators are located geographically close (Lasseter, 2011), allowing dierent manners of connection, that is, dierent topological changes. Thus, it is possible that for a
fault event at one or more points in the microgrid,
all adjacent energy sources and loads can be immediately disconnected (isolated) to prevent the
problem from spreading. However, the remainder
of the microgrid that is not aected by the fault
should continue operating normally.
Solving the problem of reconfiguration involves providing alternative ways to establish connections between loads in regions with no failures and the non-disconnected sources. Thus, reconfiguration contributes to the continuity of the
power supply in contingency situations, such as
the occurrence of a short-circuit (Shariatzadeh
et al., 2011), and can be initiated for at least three
reasons, i. e. power failure, disequilibrium in the
power balance, or maintenance activities on power

ISSN 2525-8311

network components (Cebrian and Kagan, 2010).
In the first two cases, some lower priority loads
are likely to be rejected, i.e. disconnected from
the microgrid.
In short, solving the problem of microgrid
reconfiguration includes the following processes
topology changes in the microgrid possible rejection of lower priority loads, i.e., disconnecting
them from the microgrids and maintenance of the
power balance for ensuring the operational continuity of priority loads. Therefore, the main objective of this paper is to propose a reconfiguration
methodology for smart_grids.
2
2.1

Literature Review

Microgrid Protection System

The protection system of a microgrid is fundamental to the microgrids reliable, safe and economical
operation. It was reported in (Glover et al., 2012)
that a protection system must continuously monitor the electrical network to detect abnormal conditions, remove the smallest possible portion of
the electrical system to isolate the faulty equipment, and allow the remainder of the network to

1530

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

continue to generate and distribute energy.
Studies on protection schemes for distribution systems with microgrids have been conducted since the beginning of the XXI century,
when a group of researchers initiated the Consortium for Electric Reliability Technology Solutions (Lasseter, 2011). The main requirement of a
protection system for microgrids is to ensure safe
and stable operation both in interconnected and
islanding modes (Haron et al., 2012).
Figure 1 State diagram of the smart_grid system.
2.2

Computational Techniques Applied on Smart
Grids

Graph theory has been used in the modelling, simulation and analysis of power grids (Correa and
Yusta, 2013). Heuristic methods, graph search
methods and spectral methods have been widely
used to solve combinatorial optimization problems
and graph-cut problems (Ding et al., 2014).
Optimal load-shedding strategies in distribution networks have been applied by other authors.
Such a solution was used in (Padamati et al., 2007)
to address an 8-bus shipboard power system - SPS
-, and was applied in modified CERTS (Consortium for Electric Reliability Technology Solutions)
microgrids by (Shariatzadeh et al., 2011). Several methods of computational intelligence have
been used to address the reconfiguration issue,
e.g., ant colony methods (Vuppalapati and Srivastava, 2010) and genetic algorithms (Padamati
et al., 2007).
3

Problem Formulation

In this paper, it is addressed the problem of smartgrid reconfiguration. Such a power grid is formed
by two microgrids that can cooperate with each
other in the case of a contingency situation. Figure 1 presents possible states of a power grid. One
can observe four states, namely, normal, emergency, reconfiguration and restoration. In the first
state, the smart_grid operates normally. However,
the system is set to the emergency state when any
problem is detected, aecting the power quality.
Therefore, the protection system should actuate
in the sense of identifying and isolating all fault
zones, taking the smart_grid to the reconfiguration
state. In this state, the power network can suer
changes in topology to maintain service to priority loads. Recovered from the failures, the system proceeds from the reconfiguration state to the
restoration state. Thus, the reconnection of the
restored location is performed so that the smart
grid returns to the normal state, where its original
topology is re-established.
In addition to unexpected faults, planned
maintenance or unbalanced power flows can move
the smart_grid from the normal state directly
to the reconfiguration state, where the network

ISSN 2525-8311

topology can be changed. Finally, brief failures,
which are very common in power systems, can
move the smart system from the normal state to
the emergency state, returning to the normal state
without a change in the network topology.
3.1

Testing Network

Figure 3.1 shows the single-line diagram of the
smart_grid under study. Each bus directly connected to circuit breakers is defined as a zone in
the protection scheme. Figure 3.1 presents the
graph generated from such diagram, considering
the correlation given in Table 1
Table 1 Microgrid representation as a graph.
Component of microgrid
Microsource, bus, load
Circuit breaker

3.2

Elements of graph
vertices and battery
Edge

Mathematical Formulation

To simplify the problem addressed here, is considered stable operating condition, that is, loads,
generators and batteries are consuming or supplying its rated power. Thus, both the intermittency
of renewable sources and the chargingdischarging
of the storage devices (batteries) are neglected,
leaving transient analysis to be addressed in future work.
In this work, the objective function is used
to maximise the total power delivered to the load,
balancing the generating capacity and the demand
of loads not rejected, i.e.,

PLoad

n

 M ax(
Li ), com n  Z + ,

(1)

1

subject to Pgen  Pload , where Li is the power
demanded by a load i after isolation of a fault,
Pgen is the total power generated and Pload is the
total power demanded by n loads that continue to
demand power after fault isolation.
The follow evaluation function is defined to
measure the quality of a solution
f (x)  WM xLt + Wp xPLt

(2)

1531

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

(a) Unifilar diagram

(b) Smart grid as a graph.

Figure 2 Representations of grid under study
where
 x  x1 , x2 . . . xn  is a vector in which each
element corresponds to the configuration of
a circuit breaker responsible for connectingdisconnecting a load, where xi  1 indicates that the load is connected and xi  0
indicates that the load is disconnected, with
i  1, 2, . . . n
 L  L1 , L2 . . . Ln  is a vector with the values
of the power required by each load
 Pnxn is a diagonal matrix with the priorities
of the loads and

circuit breaker, allowing a rapid location and isolation of the fault zone. Subsequently, it is possible to identify the balance of power at areas not
aected by the failure, considering the data stored
before and after the failure. Next, the existence
of areas with a negative balance of power, i.e., areas with demands of loads not being supplied, is
verified. A single negatively unbalanced zone is
sucient to start a search for one or more paths
having a positive balance of power. However, if
such positive balance is not possible, the power
grid is reconfigured to supply electrical power to
priority loads and to shed low-priority loads.
4.1

 WP and WM are weighting factors assigned
to the priority and magnitude of the loads,
respectively, with WP  1  WM .
4

Proposed Methodology

Fig 3 shows a flowchart of the proposed methodology. One can observe that the detection of a
failure triggers a series of events, among which is
the power balance event. This is possible due to
the existence of a protection system, which continuously monitors the power flowing through each

ISSN 2525-8311

Load Shedding

Reconfiguration with load shedding is a multiobjective optimisation problem that includes
Boolean variables and continuous variables. Thus,
several optimisation techniques can be applied. In
this paper has been used Genetic Algorithm due
to the simplicity of implementation.
Table 2 presents the basic parameters and
the stopping conditions used by the genetic algorithm proposed here. Therefore, the process of
load shedding begins by evaluating this standard
population and by applying the evaluation function (Equation 2). Selection criteria (Equation

1532

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

loads in the microgrid and l is the power of a load
of the microgrid, with l(0)  0.
Assuming that in the normal state, the microgrid is self-sucient, 0  Cn  Ci . Therefore,
fn 

Cn
Ci

(5)

is defined as a usage factor for normal operations
of the microgrid.
Note that a microgrid with fn close to 0 (zero)
is of great interest because it indicates a greater
ability to recover from failure situations without
suering large losses with respect to the quantity
of loads supplied. In contrast, a microgrid with fn
close to 1 (one) is undesirable because although
the grid may be self-sucient under normal operations (by assumption), any failure could result
in an imminent need of importing electrical power
andor load rejection.
Now, be
M

CR 
l(k)
(6)
k0

Figure 3 Flowchart of reconfiguration methodology.

the non-rejected total load after a reconfiguration,
where M  is the number of non-rejected loads in
a microgrid after such a reconfiguration, with 0 
M  M.
It is defined
fR 

1) is applied to the current population. A combination of chromosomes of two individuals from a
population is performed when such criteria are not
met, thus forming two new chromosomes. These
new chromosomes can also be mutated, that is, a
gene manipulation using a random process, causing changes in alleles. Thus, it generates a new
population that can reproduce if the selection criteria are not met, repeating the process.
Performance Indicators

Be
Ci 

N


g(k)

(3)

k1

the Installed Generation Capacity, where N  2
is the number of generators in a microgrid and g is
the nominal power of a generator in the microgrid.
It is noteworthy that faults in the microgrid do not
change Ci .
Be
Ln 

M


l(k)

(4)

k0

the total load supplied during normal operations
of the microgrid, where M  0 is the number of

ISSN 2525-8311

(7)

as a usage factor after a reconfiguration, where
0  fR  1.
Now, from equations 6 and 7 has
ICA 

fR
.
fn

(8)

By substituting 5 and 7 into 8 obtains
ICA 

4.2

CR
Ci

CR
,
Cn

(9)

where 0  ICA  1.
Note that ICA is independent of the Installed
Capacity (Ci ). In addition, note that ICA  0
if and only if Cn  CR  0 or if Cn neq0 and
CR  0. The first case indicates a microgrid
with no load connected. In the second case, where
CR  0, there is no load supplied by the new configuration of the microgrid. In fact, the closer ICA
is to 0 (zero), the worse the result caused by a failure. In contrast, the closer ICA is to 1 (one), the
smaller such a consequence is. Therefore, ICA  1
implies that, even in the face of a possible failure
or a planned maintenance of the power system, all
loads supplied before a reconfiguration event are
supplied after such an event. Therefore ICA can
be used to compare the dierent solutions found,
and the solution whose ICA is closest to unity will
be the most ecient.

1533

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Table 2 Basic parameters of the genetic algorithm.

Basic Parameters

Stopping criteria

Description
Population type
Population size
Mutation rate
Initial population
Possible size of the initial population
Tolerance of the evaluation function
Maximum number of generations

Value
Bit vector
40 individuals
10
Randomly generated
0 a 2nV ars
0
5

Extending the performance index of Equation
9 a set of microgrids takes to
R
ICAM 

i1 ICA (i)

R

(10)

is defined as the average index of the load supplied, where 0  ICAM  1 and R  Z + is the
number of microgrids controlled by the smart_grid.
Note that ICAM has the same characteristics that
ICA .
5

Results

Table 3 summarises the most relevant results obtained in this work. Firstly, it observes the
scenario1 where each microgrid is electrically connected to the SEP (on-grid). In this case, both
ICA and ICAM are equal to unity, i.e., all loads
are being supplied normally. The others scenarios
result from simulations of simultaneous failures in
areas of great importance, which provoke islanding of the smart_grid (faults at the buses P CC a
and P CC b) and loss of self-generation capacity
(fault at the bus Bus7b).
Figure 4 illustrates such simultaneous faults,
where can be seen the fault at Bus7b isolates the
generator G5b of Microgrid b, i.e., the generator
is not able to supply electrical power to any load.
Note that G5b is the main generator of Microgrid
b, with a nominal power equal to 150kW (see Figure 3.1). Therefore, the fault at Bus7b provokes
a loss of approximately 33 of the Installed Capacity (Ci ) of the smart_grid. This is a working
critical situation of the electrical system, which is
indicated by ICAM  0.49 (see Table 3), meaning
that only 49 of the power normally demanded
by the smart_grid is being supplied. Table 3 also
shows the loads rejected as well as the reason for
rejection.
Scenarios 3, 4 and 5 present the three attempts to improve the performance of the smart
grid after the faults introduced in Scenario 2. The
first one introduces a cooperation mechanism between microgrids by closing the circuit breaker
T IE from Figure 3.1), which is controlled by the
application of the methodology for reconfiguration
shown in Section 4, resulting in a performance improvement compared to the previous scenario, i.e.,
ICAM increased from 0.49 to 0.515.

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 4 Smart grid in reconfiguration state after
failure in P CC b, Bus7b and P CC a (Scenario
5 ).

In scenario 4 three batteries were added at
strategic points two batteries in Microgrid a connected to the busbars Bus6a and Bus2a, which
have no generator directly connected to them, and
a third battery in Microgrid b connected to Bus6b,
which also has no generator directly connected to
it and can supply many parts of the microgrid
by closing some circuit breakers that are normally
open. So, it can observe that ICAM increased to
0.89.
Finally, both cooperation by reconfiguration
and batteries are used in scenario 5, increasing
the ICAM index to 0.95. Therefore, the most of
the loads supplied pre-failure continued to be supplied after such failures, which means that the
consequences of the failures (see Scenario 2 ) were
mitigated.
6

Conclusion

In this paper, it has been shown that microgrids
can be taken to critical situations when islanding
and internal fault(s) are combined. It was also
shown that such situations can be mitigated when
batteries are strategically introduced in the micro-

1534

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Table 3 Results of case studies on smart_grid with faults in P CC a, P CC b and Bus7b.
Scenario

Battery

Cooperation

Rejected Load

Reason for Load Shedding

1

No

No

Fault isolation

2

No

No

Load1a
Load2a
Load2b
Load3b
Load4b
Load5b
Load5b
Load1a
Load3b
Load4b
Load6b
Load4a
Load5a
Load1a
Load2b
Load5b
Load5b
Load1a

3

No

Yes

4

Yes

No

5

Yes

Yes

grid. However, batteries are expensive solutions.
This led to the introduction of an intelligent reconfiguration scheme, aiming at cooperation between
microgrids. Although the results have shown that
cooperation between microgrids has not had such
a positive eect as the introduction of batteries, it
was noted an improvement in fact without adding
any extra monetary cost on the grid.
The main focus of this work was on developing a methodology for reconfiguration to maintain
the electrical power balance of portions of a smart
grid not aected by failures, so that to minimise
load shedding, especially for higher priority nodes
with greater power requirements. The methodology was applied to a smart_grid that was also proposed in this paper, which contains two microgrids
that operate individually under normal circumstances but that can cooperate to mitigate the impacts of failures. The results obtained were characterised qualitatively through graphs and quantitatively via formalised performance indicators.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank CNPqBrazil (process
4433842014-2) and FAPES-ESBrazil (Process
6765125914) for the financial support to this
research.
References
Cebrian, J. C. and Kagan, N. (2010). Reconfiguration of distribution networks to minimize loss and disruption costs using genetic
algorithms, Electric Power Systems Research
80(1) 5362.

Power flow unbalanced

ICA

ICAM

a
1

b
1

0.54

0.44

0.49

0.50

0.53

0.515

0.96

0.78

0.89

0.96

0.94

0.95

1

Fault isolation
Fault isolation
Fault isolation

Power flow unbalanced

Fault isolation
Power flow unbalanced
Fault isolation
Fault isolation
Fault isolation

Ding, L., Wall, P. and Terzija, V. (2014). Constrained spectral clustering based controlled
islanding, Electrical Power and Energy Systems pp. 687694.
Glover, J. D., Sarma, M. S. and Overbye, T. J.
(2012). Power System - Analysis and Design,
5 edn, Cengage Learning.
Haron, A. R., Mohamed, A. and Shareef, H.
(2012). A review on protection schemes and
coordination techniques in microgrid system,
Journal of Applied Sciences 1(12) 101112.
Lasseter, R. H. (2011). Smart distribution Coupled microgrids, Vol. 99, Proceedings of the
IEEE, pp. 10741082.
Padamati, R. K., Schulz, N. N. and Srivastava,
A. K. (2007). Application of genetic algorithm for reconfiguration of shipboard power
system, 39th North American Power Symposium .
Shariatzadeh, F., Zamora, R. and Srivastava,
A. K. (2011). Real time implementation of
microgrid reconfiguration, North American
Power Symposium .
Vuppalapati, S. H. K. and Srivastava, A. K.
(2010). Application of ant colony optimization for reconfiguration of shipboard power
system, International Journal of Engineering, Science and Technology 2 119131.

Correa, G. J. and Yusta, J. M. (2013). Grid vulnerability analysis based on scale-free graphs
versus power flow models, Electric Power
Systems Research 101 7179.

ISSN 2525-8311

1535