Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

LONG CABLE MOTOR DRIVE SYSTEM EMPLOYING DC TRANSMISSION
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Helder de Paula, Wellington P. de Almeida, Philipe Pereira, Anderson V. Rocha,
Braz J. C. Filho


Electrical Engineering Department
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil


Electrical Engineering Department
CEFET - MG, Brazil

Emails helder@cpdee.ufmg.br, welington@deii.cefetmg.br, philipe.mineiro@gmail.com,
andersonrocha@des.cefetmg.br, braz.cardoso@ieee.org
Abstract Driving induction motors with PWM inverters through long distances result in several undesired
high frequency phenomena, such as transient overvoltages at the motor terminals, common-mode currents flowing
through the system and the presence of a cable charging current, among others. Instead of filters, which represent
the traditional method for the mitigation of these problems, in a previous work the authors proposed an alternative
solution, where the rectifier and inverter bridges are separated and connected by the long cable, being the latter
located right besides the motor. This alternative configuration, based on DC transmission, aside from solving the
aforementioned problems, provides the additional benefits of reducing the voltage drop in the cable and providing
copper economy for the power transmission. In this context, in the present work a prototype of a long cable
motor drive system was built in both configurations (conventional and with DC transmission). Several results
involving the transient overvoltages, cable charging and common-mode currents were obtained from each system
and compared, in order to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed drive system topology in reducing these
undesirable phenomena.
Keywords Transient overvoltages, common-mode currents, cable charging current, long cables, induction
motor drives, PWM inverters.
Resumo O acionamento_de_motores_de_inducao em longas distancias, por meio de inversores PWM, provoca a
ocorrencia de diversos fenomenos indesejados de alta frequencia, tais como sobretensoes_transitorias nos terminais
do motor, correntes_de_modo_comum fluindo pelo sistema e a presenca de uma corrente de carregamento do
cabo, dentre outros. Ao inves da utilizacao de filtros, que representam o metodo tradicional para a reducao
destes problemas, em um trabalho anterior os autores propuseram uma solucao alternativa, onde as pontes
retificadora e inversora foram separadas e conectadas entre si por meio do cabo longo, sendo a ultima instalada
diretamente ao lado do motor. Esta configuracao alternativa, baseada portanto em transmissao CC, alem de
solucionar todos os problemas supracitados, apresenta como benefcios adicionais a reducao da queda de tensao
no cabo e tambem uma economia do cobre necessario para a transmissao de energia. Neste contexto, no presente
trabalho construiu-se o prototipo de um sistema de acionamento de motores utilizando cabos_longos, nestas duas
configuracoes (convencional e com transmissao CC). Diversos resultados relativos as sobretensoes_transitorias,
corrente de carregamento do cabo e correntes_de_modo_comum foram obtidos em cada sistema e comparados
entre si, com o objetivo de demonstrar a eficiencia da topologia proposta na reducao de tais fenomenos.
Palavras-chave .

1

Introduction

D.C. link voltage (VDC ) (Kerkman et al., 1997)
and, in critical cases, can reduce the motor insulation life to a few weeks (Fenger et al., 2002).
Besides, in every voltage transition from zero to
VDC or vice-versa, all the distributed cable capacitance is successively charged or discharged, resulting in a high-frequency transient current component overlapped to the fundamental output inverter current. This so-called cable charging current can be high enough to cause the inverter
trip due to overcurrent protection, generate overheat and destruction of snubber capacitances and
also degrade the current measurements for feedback purposes (Leggate et al., 1999 Rahman
et al., 1999 Suwankawin et al., 2005).
Another issue concerning PWM drives is the
presence of high-frequency earth-return currents.
The common mode voltage produced by the inverter excites the capacitive couplings between

In its early days, the application of frequency
converters for motor speed control brought on a
series of concerns, such as (Murphy and Turnbull, 1989) overheating in low speeds additional
losses due to non-sinusoidal supply excessive temperature rise, possible useful life reduction and
need of de-rating torque oscillations and associated problems among others.
As a consequence of the remarkable advances
in the power electronics and microprocessing fields
in the last decades, such problems were overcomed, while others came upon (Kerkman, 1996
Saunders et al., 1996). One of them is the generation of transient overvoltages at motor terminals, due to the PWM pulses propagation and reflection at cable endings. The resulting voltage
peaks can reach up to three times the converter

1997

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

conductors and motor parts to the ground, generating successive high-frequency oscillatory currents in every dv
dt of the corresponding voltage.
As a consequence, EMI problems in industrial
plants can arise, as well as misactuation of faultto-ground protection relays and motor bearing
failures (von Jouanne et al., 1998 Araujo, Rodrigues, de Paula, Baccarini and Rocha, 2013).
Common-mode current peaks of 50A have been
reported (Suwankawin et al., 2005) in a textile
industry subsystem comprising 75 motors of 3kW
rated power.
In general, the mitigation of such undesirable phenomena is obtained with the use of filters, of different types and functions (Araujo,
Rodrigues, de Paula, Filho, Baccarini and Rocha,
2013 Hongfei and Dianguo, 2001 Bolsens et al.,
2003 Finlayson, 1998). However, they do not
represent the ultimate solution for the problem,
since their cost, weight and physical dimensions
are oftentimes high and the electrical losses in
their resistive elements degrade the overall energy efficiency of the drive system. In face of
this, a completely different approach for the aforementioned high-frequency phenomena elimination
was proposed by the authors in (de Castro Jr.
et al., 2012), where the frequency converter was
split into its rectifier and inverter units, being now
away from each other, with the was latter installed
directly besides the motor. In this way, the long
cable, employed so far to connect the frequency
converter to the motor, now connects the rectifier
to the inverter bridge through DC transmission, as
it is illustrated in Figure 1. This alternative configuration eliminates all the problems cited before
and, as an additional benefit, reduces the voltage
drop in the long cable and the amount of copper
required for the power transmission the quantification of the copper economy was fully evaluated
in (de Castro Jr. et al., 2012).

ble charging current were obtained from both systems and confronted in order to show the effectiveness of the proposed drive system topology in
reducing these undesirable phenomena.
2
2.1

Experimental setup

System Components

In order to evaluate the performances of the proposed drive system configuration, a prototype has
been built. The system comprises the components
listed in the Table 1 and was designed to supply
motors up to 3hp. It is important to emphasize
that an eventual change in the system rated power
will not affect the conclusions which will be obtained in this work, since the interactions between
the inverter and the cables depend mainly on the
switching frequency, the rise and fall times of the
PWM pulses and the length of the cable.
The scheme of the conventional drive system
is illustrated in Figure 2(a), while the alternative
configuration, employing DC transmission, is presented in Figure 2(b). The interconnection cable
is 400 meters long.
In the proposed drive topology, the first frequency converter is connected to the grid and it is
used only as a rectifier, being the long cable connected directly to its DC link, with its AC output terminals left open. For the interconnection,
two wires of the cable were used, which were connected to the input of the second frequency converter, and not directly to its DC link, avoiding a
mistaken and dangerous polarity mismatch.
The association of the capacitors bank of both
converters with the inherent distributed capacitance and inductance of the long cable establishes
an LC resonant circuit in the DC link with a high
Q-factor value, since there is no significant dissipative elements. The energization of this circuit
will result in oscillations with peak values about
twice the DC nominal voltage value, high enough
to destroy the capacitors. For this reason, it is
necessary to insert a pre-charge resistor in order to
overdamp the resulting circuit and to avoid such
harmful energization transients.

(a)

Table 1 Experimental setup components
Component
Equipment

(b)

Figure 1 Conventional and proposed topology for
a motor drive with a long cable connection

Frequency converter

In the present work, a prototype of a motor
drive system with such DC transmission was designed and built, along with another one using the
traditional configuration, for the purpose of experimental comparison. Several results related to
the transient overvoltages at the motor terminals,
common-mode currents in the system and the ca-

Cable

CFW-09 inverter
400m four-core
XLPE-insulated cable

Pre-charge resistor

200, 500 W

1st Motor

WEG 3 Hp 4-pole motor

2nd Motor

1998

Two 5 Hp WEG

General Electric
3 Hp460 V 4-pole motor

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

(a)

(b)

Figure 2 Connections of the frequency inverters, the four-core cable and the motor for the conventional
and proposed drive systems.
The use of only two wires in the DC transmission setup imposes a higher current flow in each
one of them, if compared with the conventional
AC system, where the current is distributed between three wires. For the particular case of the
present setup, which uses a 400-meter cable, the
applicable standard for cable sizing determined
the use of wires with the same gauge, even with
this difference in the current value, since the next
commercially available gauge which satisfies the
maximum current criteria happens to be the same
for both systems.
As it is indicated in Table 1, two motors had
to be used during the tests, for reasons to be discussed and detailed in section 3.
Figure 3 shows a picture of the experimental
setup.

2.2

Measuring Instruments

The main purpose of the proposed drive topology is to eliminate the high frequency phenomena mentioned in section 1. Having said that, the
most relevant measurements to be conducted in
both systems to be latter compared are
 Line-to-line voltages measured at both extremities of the cable, which provide a clear
picture of the transient overvoltages at the
motor terminals
 Current flowing through the ground, induced
by the common-mode voltage generated by
the inverter
 Current flowing through the mutual capacitance between the cable phases, also known
as cable charging current.
The instruments used to perform the measurements are listed in Table 2.
Table 2 Measuring instruments
Equipment
Model
Active differential
voltage probe
Current probe
Amplifier for

Figure 3 Experimental setup (1) frequency converter used as the rectifier (2) 400 m four-core
cable (3) pre-charge resistor (4) frequency converter used the inverter (5) induction motor (6)
measuring instruments.

current probe
Digital oscilloscope

1999

Tektronix P5200
Tektronix A6302, frequency
range 0-50 MHz, Imax  20A
Tektronix TM503B
Tektronix TDS 1001B,
40MHz, 500MSs

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

3
3.1

Results and discussion

by the transient overvoltages to which the motor
was submitted to, since it was an older version of
this manufacturers model that was not apposite
for this application.
Figure 4 shows the similarity between the
PWM-waveform at the inverter output and the
motor windings, since there is only one meter of
cable between them.

Line-to-line voltage

This quantity was measured in order to compare
the voltage waveform generate by the inverter to
that one arriving in the motor terminals after being transmitted through the cable. For the traditional drive configuration, the aforementioned
400-meter cable was installed between the motor
and the inverter for the proposed DC transmission drive, such cable is connected between the
rectifier and the three-phase bridge, forming an
extended DC link. In this case, the cable connecting the inverter to the motor is one meter long.
Figure 4 shows the difference between the PWMwaveform at the inverter output and its modified
shape after being transmitted through the cable.

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 5 Line-to-line voltages measured at the
both extremities of the cable for the proposed
drive configuration.

(c)

A simple comparison of the results indicates
the absence of the overvoltage, which implies in a
reduced stress over the motor windings, demonstrating one of the advantages of the proposed
topology.

(d)

Figure 4 Line-to-line voltages measured at both
extremities of the cable for the traditional drive
configuration.

3.2

It can be easily observed that the successive
reflections of the PWM pulses produce a transient
overvoltage with a damped oscillation that occurs
for each rise or fall of the PWM voltage level. A
continuous and repeated exposure of the motor
windings to this overvoltage may damage their insulation and may eventually lead to their failure.
Recently manufactured motors whose insulation
has been designed in order to support this additional stress may not suffer such problem, provided that some conditions are respected, for example, the use of a frequency inverter whose pulses
have a rise time higher than 100ns and with interspaces of 5s (NEMA MG-1, part 31, 2009).
As it was pointed out in section 2.1, two motors were used during the tests and one of which
suffered an insulation failure during the tests and
was rendered useless. This incident was caused

In this section, the current induced by the
common-mode voltage in the capacitive couplings
to the ground both from the motor and cable is
analyzed.
Firstly, such currents are measured at the wire
connecting the motor frame to the fourth core of
the cable (points 1 and 2 in Figure 6), acting
as returning path for the current. The quantity
measured represents the parcel of the commonmode current related only to the motor (Figures 7
and 8). After, the measurements are taken at the
other end of the fourth conductor, the one connected to the inverter frame (points 3 and 4 in
Figure 6). In this case, the measured values are
the sum of the motor capacitive charging current
(measured previously) with the currents required
to charge and discharge the cable distributed capacitance each cycle (Figures 9 and 10). In either

2000

Common-mode current measured at the motor grounding

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

case, the common-mode voltage was also measured in the motor terminals (neutral at the star
point of the windings to ground voltage).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 6 Points where the measurements were
taken.

Figure 8 Neutral-to-ground voltage and motor
frame to ground current, measured near the motor
for the proposed drive configuration (point 2 in
Figure 6), 1Adivision.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(d)

Figure 7 Neutral-to-ground voltage and motor
frame to ground current, measured near the motor
for the traditional drive configuration (point 1 in
Figure 6), 200mAdivision.
An analysis of Figure 7 shows that for each
variation in common-mode voltage level, corresponding to a change of one third of the DC link
voltage, it is observed peak currents about 3.2 divisions 200mA  0.65A. The voltage damped
oscillatory response represents the successive reflections of the voltage pulses propagated through
the zero-sequence circuit and induces the current
oscillations that follow the peak currents.
For the DC transmission setup, Figure 8 indicates the presence of current peaks whose values
are much higher then the ones measured in the
traditional configuration, about 2.3A. This difference is explained by the fact that the voltage
pulses generated by the frequency converter are
smoothed by the 400-meter cable in the AC trans-

Figure 9 Neutral-to-ground voltage and frame
to ground current, measured near the inverter for
the traditional drive configuration (point 3 in Figure 6), 1Adivision.

mission system, resulting in lower peak currents.
In the proposed configuration, the one-meter cable doesnt modify signicantly the PWM pulse,
maintaining almost the same variation rate found
at the inverter output, resulting in higher peak
currents.
Another difference is the damped frequency
of the oscillations, lower for the proposed drive
configuration. In the AC transmission setup, the

2001

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

current for each variation in the line-to-line voltage at the inverter output, which must be supplied by the switches. The resulting line current is
the superposition of a low frequency current (fundamental and switching frequency) and transient
peak currents flowing though the differential mode
circuit, which is responsible for many problems
aforementioned in Section 1.
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 10 Neutral-to-ground voltage and frame
to ground current, measured near the inverter for
the proposed drive configuration (point 4 in Figure 6), 1Adivision.
larger cable length implies a higher travel time for
the PWM pulses, extending the oscillatory behavior for a significant period. For narrower PWM
pulses, the oscillatory response may even overlaps
the subsequent one. In the case of the DC transmission, the shorter travel time reduces the duration of these oscillations. One can conclude that
for the DC transmission setup the peak current
value is higher but the following oscillations last
shorter.
Analyzing the measurements obtained from
the inverted frame grounding point, Figure 9
shows an increase in the peak current value to
about 4.3A for the AC transmission system, which
indicates that the necessary charging current for
the aggregate motor-cable is higher than the motor charging current only. In the case of the DC
transmission, Figure 10 shows that the peak current has virtually the same value, about 2.3A,
since there is only one meter of cable between the
motor and inverter frames. The resulting conclusion is that the DC transmission setup demands a
lower overall charging current compared with traditional drive configuration in the present case, it
is about 50, even with the higher variation rate
of the pulse over the motor windings. This difference is due to the current necessary to charge
all the distributed capacitances to ground of the
cable.
3.3

Figure 11 Line current measured at the inverter output for the traditional drive configuration, 5Adivision.
The peak currents in the conventional AC
transmission system, indicated in Figure 11, have
values up to 18A. Since the motor operates with
a fundamental sinusoidal current of 2.6A of peak
value, the transient peaks reach seven times this
value. As a result, the line current presents a polluted waveform, far from what is expected for a
sinusoidal quantity.
For the DC transmission setup, the peak currents values are up to 3.6A, indicating a reduction
of 80 compared with the conventional system.
The general waveform is quite sinusoidal, indicating a reduction in the harmonic content.
4

Conclusion

The experimental results shown in the previous
sections demonstrate that the proposed topology
of a split frequency converter with DC transmission for long cables connections brings some unequivocal advantages to the system. The measurements of the common-mode current at different grounding points, the charging current of
the cables and the transient voltage for both conventional and proposed configurations show explicitly that the DC transmission reduces the effects of many of the high-frequency phenomena

Cable charging current

Beyond the common-mode current necessary to
charge the capacitance to ground of the cable, the
mutual capacitance demands an additional line

2002

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Transmission line effects on motor feed cables Terminator design and analysis in the
laplace-domain, IEEE International Electric
Machines and Drives Conference, pp. 1866
1872.

(a)

de Castro Jr., J. A., de Paula, H., Filho, B. and
Rocha, A. (2012). Rectifier-to-inverter connection through long DC cable - part ii The
complete copper economy characterization,
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications
48 229  235.

(b)

Fenger, M., Campbell, S. R. and Pedersen, J.
(2002). Dealing with motor winding problems caused by inverter drives, IEEE 44th
IAS Annual Meeting, pp. 6576.

(c)

Finlayson, P. T. (1998). Output filters for PWM
drives with induction motors, IEEE Industry
Applications Magazine pp. 4652.

(d)

Figure 12 Line current measured at the inverter output for the proposed drive configuration,
2Adivision.

Hongfei, M. and Dianguo, X. (2001). Research of
inverter output filters for PWM drives, IEEE
International Conference on Electrical Machines and Systems 1 546549.

caused by the use of frequency inverter in motor
drives. It is important to emphasize that the proposed topology allows the complete elimination
of the overvoltage caused by the reflected pulses
through the cables, sparing the winding insulation
from this repeated stress, reduces the circulation
of common-mode current, decreasing the electromagnetic interference in adjacent system, and reduces the differential-mode current circulating in
the system, which is responsible for the blowing
of inverter bridge snubbers and the untimely protection actuation.

Kerkman, R. J. (1996). Twenty years of PWM
AC drives When secondary issues become
primary concerns, IEEE 22th IECON, Vol. 1,
pp. LVIILXIII.
Kerkman, R. J., Leggate, D. and Skibinsky,
G. L. (1997). Interaction of drive modulation and cable parameters on ac motor transients, IEEE Trans. on Industry Applications
33(3) 722731.
Leggate, D., Pankau, J., Schlegel, D., Kerkman,
R. J. and Skibinski, G. L. (1999). Reflected
waves and their associated current, IEEE
Trans. on Industry Applications 33(6) 1383
1392.

Acknowledgment
To FAPEMIG, for the financial support.

Murphy, J. M. D. and Turnbull, F. G. (1989).
Power Electronic Control of AC Motors,
Pergamom Press.

References

NEMA MG-1, part 31 (2009).

Araujo, R., Rodrigues, R., de Paula, H., Baccarini, L. and Rocha, A. (2013). Premature
wear and recurring bearing failures in an inverter driven induction motor - part I Investigation of the problem, IEEE Industry Applications Society Annual Meeting.

Rahman, M. F., Haider, T., Haque, E., Blackburn, T. and Grantham, C. (1999). Modelling and experimental studies of effects of
steep fronted inverter waveforms on motor
and supply cabling and their remedies, IEEE
Intern. Conference on Power Electronics and
Drive Systems 1 519524.

Araujo, R., Rodrigues, R., de Paula, H., Filho,
B., Baccarini, L. and Rocha, A. (2013). Premature wear and recurring bearing failures in
an inverter driven induction motor - part II
The proposed solution, IEEE Industry Applications Society Annual Meeting.

Saunders, L., Skibinski, G., Evon, S. and Kempkes, D. (1996). Riding the reflected waveIGBT drive technology demands new motor and cable considerations, Petroleum and
Chemical Industry Conference, Record of
Conference Papers. IEEE 43rd IAS Annual
meeting, pp. 75  84.

Bolsens, B., De Brabandere, K., Van Den Keybus,
J., Driesen, J. L. and Belmans, R. (2003).

2003

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Suwankawin, S., Pairodamonchai, P., Sangwongwanich, S., Sukhapap, C. and Tearwattanarattikal, W. (2005). Destruction by charge
current and its solution for pwm inverter
feeding multiple motors through long cables,
IEEE 40th IAS Annual Meeting pp. 1382
1389.
von Jouanne, A., Zhang, H. and Wallace, A.
(1998). An evaluation of mitigation techniques for bearing currents, emi and overvoltages in asd applications, IEEE Trans. on Industry Applications 34(5) 11131122.

2004