XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

NONHOLONOMIC MOTION PLANNING IN PARTIALLY UNKNOWN
ENVIRONMENTS USING VECTOR FIELDS AND OPTIMAL PLANNERS
Guilherme A. S. Pereira, Sanjiban Choudhury, Sebastian Scherer


School of Engineering, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil


Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Emails gpereira@ufmg.br, sanjibac@andrew.cmu.edu, basti@andrew.cmu.edu
Abstract This paper presents a methodology to integrate vector field-based robot motion planning techniques with optimal trajectory planners. The main motivation for this integration is the solution of planning
problems that are intuitively solved using vector fields, but are very difficult to be even posed as an optimal motion planning problem, mainly due to the lack of a clear cost function. Among such problems are the ones where
a goal configuration is not defined, such as circulation of curves and road following. While several vector field
based methodologies were proposed to solve these tasks, they do not explicitly consider the robots differential
constraints and are susceptible to failures in the presence of previously unmodeled obstacles. Our methodology
uses a vector field as a high level specification of a task and an optimal motion planner (in our case RRT*) as a
local planner that generates trajectories that follow the vector field and also consider the kinematic and dynamic
constraints of the robot, as well as the new obstacles encountered in the workspace. To illustrate the approach,
we show simulations with a Dubins like vehicle moving in partially unknown planar environments.
Keywords

Robotics, motion planning, vector fields, optimal planning, RRT*.

Resumo Este artigo apresenta uma metodologia para integracao de tecnicas de planejamento_de_movimento
para robos baseadas em campos_vetorias e planejadores otimos. A principal motivacao para essa integracao e
a solucao de problemas de planejamento que sao intuitivamente solucionados usando campos vetoriais, mas sao
muito difcies de serem modelados como um problema de planejamento_otimo, principalmente devido a falta de
uma funcao de custo. Entre esses problemas estao aqueles em que um alvo nao e definido, como circulacao de
curvas e seguimento de rodovias. Enquanto varias metodologias baseadas em campos vetoriais foram propostas
para solucionar essas tarefas, elas nao consideram explicitamente as restricoes diferenciais dos robos e estao
sujeitas a falhas na presenca de obstaculos que nao foram previamente modelados. A metodologia proposta nesse
artigo usa um campo vetorial como uma especificacao de alto nvel para uma tarefa e um planejador otimo (nesse
caso o RRT*) como um planejador local que gera trajetorias que seguem o campo vetorial e tambem consideram
as restricoes cinematicas e dinamicas do robo, bem como os novos obstaculos encontrados em seu espaco de
trabalho. Para ilustrar a metodologia, o artigo apresenta simulacoes utilizando um robo com cinematica de
Dubins se locovendo em um ambiente planar parcialmente conhecido.
Palavras-chave

.

Introduction

In recent years, optimal motion planning techniques have been proposed to solve problems encountered by several types of robots, ranging from
humanoids with several degrees of freedom (Sohn
and Oh, 2015) to high speed nonholonomic vehicles (Jeon et al., 2013). Besides finding optimal trajectories, these planners may consider the
robots differential constraints to guarantee that
the resultant trajectories can be followed by the
robot. In this category, an important global motion planning technique is the asymptotically optimal version of The Rapidly-Exploring Random
Tree (RRT) (LaValle and Kuffner, 2001), called
RRT* (Karaman and Frazzoli, 2011). RRT* is
used to search for optimal trajectories from a given
initial configuration to a specific goal region. In
fact, RRT* is a very powerful tool that can be
interpreted as an anytime computation framework for optimization problems with complex differential and geometric constraints (Karaman
et al., 2011). In this context, anytime means
that the method quickly finds a feasible, but not
necessarily optimal solution for the problem, then

ISSN 2525-8311

incrementally improves it towards optimality. Although RRT* and other optimal planners are used
in several robotic problems, they are limited to
bounded workspaces with a well defined goal region. It is then difficult to use this tool in some
tasks that include persistent monitoring of ground
areas, tracking of moving targets, and navigation
in urban environments, where a goal configuration
is not specified. Moreover, for this kind of task,
where the workspace can be very large, the computational time of RRT* can prevent its use for
real time operations. Solutions for these problems
have been proposed by some authors, generally
combining RRT* with other strategy. One example is (Kuwata et al., 2009), which uses a higher
level planner to define a sequence of waypoints
and use RRT* to reach each waypoint in minimum time avoiding obstacles and respecting the
vehicle constraints.
In this paper we combine RRT* with a vector field methodology. We do not assume any
specific vector field, which may be computed as
the gradient of a potential or navigation function (Khatib, 1986 Rimon and Koditschek, 1992)
but, more important, can be the ones that aim,

249

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

for example, circulation of curves for perimeter
surveillance (Goncalves et al., 2010) or corridor
following (Pereira et al., 2009). Although vector fields have been used alone to control several
kinds of real world robots, ranging from manipulators (Khatib, 1986) to fixed wings unnamed aerial
vehicles (UAVs) (Frew et al., 2008), most of the
methodologies cannot be easily extended to multidimensional spaces and complex environments.
Also they do not explicitly consider the robots differential constraints, what requires the use on nonlinear_controllers to track the field (what in some
cases cannot be achieved) or the combination of
the field with other techniques (Owen et al., 2014).
Moreover, vector fields are better applied for static
and previously known workspaces. Although the
technique was originally created to deal with dynamic environments, global convergence properties are generally lost in such situations. A few
works have locally modified the vector field in real
time to avoid dynamical obstacles and still maintained convergence properties (Esposito and Kumar, 2002 Loizou et al., 2003), but this modification generally does not consider the quality of the
final trajectory.
To allow motion planning for nonholonomic
robots moving in partially unknown and dynamic workspaces, this paper builds upon the
path planning framework proposed by the authors
in (Pereira et al., 2016). The main contribution of this paper is the inclusion of differential
constraints on the optimization problem proposed
by Pereira et al. (2016) to allow the computation
of trajectories for nonholonomic robots. With this
modification, the framework can now i) extend
the use of RRT* and other optimal planners to the
several tasks that can be easily solved using vector
fields but that could not be directly solved with
optimal planners, and ii) add some of the important properties of the optimal planners, such as
the consideration of the vehicle differential constraints and optimality, to well known vector field
methodologies.
By the authors knowledge, besides (Pereira
et al., 2016), RRT* and vector fields were only
used together in (Qureshi et al., 2013), where
the authors propose a new sampling strategy
for RRT* that, using a vector field, guides the
search tree towards the goal, thus speeding up the
method. Differently from (Qureshi et al., 2013),
in (Pereira et al., 2016), and consequently in the
present paper, RRT* is tightly coupled with the
vector field in the sense that the field is used to
define the cost function to be minimized by RRT*.
This is only possible because, as it is usual in the
RRT* literature (Karaman et al., 2011), although
constraints in the robots state space are considered, the planing is actually done in the lower dimensional task space or even in the configuration
space, where the vector field is generated. Next

ISSN 2525-8311

section will formally define our problem
2

Problem Definition

Let Q  Rn be the configuration space of a robot
and Qobs  Q be an invalid set of configurations that result in collision. We assume that
k
Qobs  Qkobs Qm
obs , where Qobs is the set of previously known obstacles, and Qm
obs is the set of movable and previously unknown obstacles. The free
configuration space is defined as Qfree  QQobs .
Also, let u  QQkobs  Rn be a continuous vector
field that assigns a vector u(q) to each configuration q  Qfree  Qm
obs . This vector field is responsible for the specification of the robot task and is
computed by a global planner that has no knowledge about Qm
obs . The robot dynamics is specified by constraints of the form g (q, q, q, . . . )  0,
q  Q. Finally, let the trajectory   0, 1  Q be
a smoothing mapping from time to configuration.
Our local motion planning problem can then be
posed as
Problem 1 Find, inside the ball Br  Q of radius r centered at the initial configuration q0 
Qfree , the smallest collision free and dynamically
feasible trajectory that starts at q0 and follows
the vector field as close as possible. This problem
can be written as
Z 1
minimize
F , u 
f (( ), u (( ))) d


0

subject to
(0)  q0 ,
k(1)  (0)k  r ,


 ,
 ...  0,
g , ,
(t)  Qfree , t  0, 1 .
It is important to notice that Problem 1
presents two major differences in relation to the
standard motion planning problem. First, there
is no definition of a goal configuration. This is
replaced by a constraint that enforces the distance between the initial configuration and the
end of the trajectory. Second, F , u, which represents the cost functional for the optimization
problem, substituted the traditional euclidean distance function. Since no goal configuration is defined, it is the role of this functional to dictate
the direction of the robot movement. To consider
both the vector field and the length of the trajectory, we propose in (Pereira et al., 2016) a cost
functional of the form
1

Z


ab

F , u 
0


 )
u(( ))
(
 )kd ,

k(
 )k ku(( ))k
k(
(1)

where a, b  R+ and a > b. The values of a and
b are chosen so that the cost is small when the
trajectory is parallel to the vector field (the inner

250

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

product between the normalized field vector and
the unit vector tangent to the trajectory is one),
and increases when the trajectory is not parallel
to the field (inner product is smaller than one). If
a  2 and b  1, for example, the cost for the case
in which the trajectory is anti-parallel to the field
(inner product is -1) will be three times higher
than the one in which it is parallel to field, considering the same length of the tangent vector. As
shown by Pereira et al. (2016), cost functional (1)
is non-symmetric, strictly positive, bounded, additive and, as long as a  b > 0, it is also monotonic.
3

Methodology

Following (Pereira et al., 2016), in this paper
we solve Problem 1 using RRT*. Although another optimization based motion planner could
be used, sampling based motion planners such
as RRT* have two important characteristics that
are suitable for our problem, which requires real
time planning in partially unknown workspaces
1) they do not require an explicit geometric representation of the environment, important when
new obstacles are detected, and 2) because they
are anytime planners, a solution, albeit not necessarily optimal, can be found very fast and improved if more time is available. We rapidly explain RRT* in the next subsection.
3.1

RRT*

RRT* basically works in two phases. In the first
phase, a tree (graph without loops) with root at
the origin is computed. The nodes of the tree are
free random samples of the robots configuration
space and the edges represent the existence of a
trajectory between two nodes. The edges are chosen so that paths (sequence of nodes) that start
at the root represent the best possible trajectories from the root to any node of the tree. In the
second phase of the method, called query phase,
the trajectory to be followed by the robot is then
extracted from the tree.
The algorithm for computing an optimal tree
using RRT* is shown in Algorithm 1. The basic
functions called by this algorithm are
 SampleFree Generates a random configuration in Qfree .
 Nearest Finds the node of graph G that is
the closest to qnew in terms of a given distance
function.
 Steer(qi , qj ) Computes a trajectory  that
starts in qi and finishes in qj . This trajectory must respect differential
constrains of

 ,
 . . .  0.
the form g , ,
 CollisionFree() Returns True if the
trajectory  lies in Qfree and False otherwise.

ISSN 2525-8311

Algorithm 1 RRT*
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

V  q0   E    t  0 
while t < tmax do
qnew  SampleFree 
qnearest  Nearest(G  (V, E), qnew ) 
new  Steer(qnearest , qnew )
if CollisionFree(new ) then
Qnear  Near(G  (V, E), qnew , ) 
V  V  qnew  
qmin  qnearest 
cmin  Cost(qnearest ) + TCost(new ) 
for all qnear  Qnear do
 0  Steer(qnear , qnew )
if CollisionFree( 0 ) 
Cost(qnear ) + TCost( 0 ) < cmin then
qmin  qnear 
cmin  Cost(qnear ) + TCost( 0 ) 
end if
end for
E  E  (qmin , qnew ) 
for all qnear  Qnear do
 0  Steer(qnew , qnear )
if CollisionFree( 0 ) 
Cost(qnew )+TCost( 0 ) < Cost(qnear ) then
qparent  Parent(qnear ) 
E  E(qparent , qnear )(qnew , qnear )
end if
end for
end if
end while
return G  (V, E)

 Near(G  (V, E), qi , ) Computes the set
of nodes of graph G that are inside the
ball centered in qi and radius determined by
 (Karaman and Frazzoli, 2011).
 Cost(qi ) Returns the cost of the trajectory
that starts in q0 and finishes in qi . This information is generally stored in the tree.
 TCost() Computes the cost of trajectory
 using the specified cost function.
 Parent(qi ) Returns the parent node of qi
in tree G. By convention, if qi is the root of
G, the function will return qi .
The RRT* algorithm starts with a empty
graph G  (V, E), where V is the node set and E
is the edge set, and returns a tree (graph without
loops) with root node at the initial configuration
(line 1 of Algorithm 1). For a given constant time
tmax , the algorithm generates random samples of
the free configuration space and try to compute
trajectories that connects these samples to a node
of the tree. For each random sample, if a free trajectory from the samples closest node exist, the
sample is included as a node of the tree (lines 48).
After that, the algorithm looks for even best trajectories from other nodes of the tree to the new
node (lines 918). The best trajectory found will
define a new edge on the tree (line 19). In a second
optimization step, the algorithm tries to rewire
the tree by checking if the inclusion of the new
node can reduce the cost of reaching other nodes
of the tree (lines 2027).
Once the tree is computed, either one of their
nodes is chosen to be the end of the trajectory

251

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

(what will be done in this work), or the goal position is connected to tree using the same procedure
used to connect qnew . Since each node has a reference to its parent, a trajectory is then computed
by simply following these references from the goal
to the start position. To solve Problem 1 using
RRT*, the correct definition of functions SampleFree, Steer and TCost is necessary. These
functions are defined next.

For planar nonholonomic robots, an efficient
solution to the steering problem is to assume that
the robot can be modeled using the Dubins model
with constant linear velocity and fixed turning radius. This model is given by

3.2

where x, y and  form the robots configuration
q, v and  are the robots input velocities and 
is the robots turning radius. In this situation, it
is always possible to steer the robot between two
configurations using a sequence of simple motions
that either make the robot to move straight or to
turn with its fixed turning radius. This idea was
implemented in this paper using the same strategy
proposed by Karaman et al. (2011) where four of
the six possible sequences of motions are used to
steer the robot.

Sampling function

Since Problem 1 specifies that a trajectory must
start at q0 and finish at the surface of a ball of
radius r centered at q0 , it makes sense to uniformly generate samples only inside this ball. A
way to do this is to represent the ball in spherical
coordinates and sample for each coordinate. In
2D, the spheric coordinates are the radius, d, and
azimuthal angle, . Since the probability that a
given sample is inside the ball of radius r is proportional to r2 , we can generate samples for the

radius as d  r v1 , where v1 is a real random
number sampled with uniform distribution over
the interval 0, 1. The other coordinate, , can
be generated as   2v2 , where v2 is a random
variable similar to v1 , but independent of v1 . For
planar nonholonomic mobile robots, besides position, the robots orientation , must also be sampled. Following the way  is sampled, we can generate the orientation as   2v3 , where v3 is a
random variable independent of v1 and v2 . Therefore each random configuration for a planar mobile
robot is given by q  d cos(), d sin(), T . This
procedure can be extended for robots with more
degrees of freedom.
Since function SampleFree assumes free
configurations, after generated, the configuration
must be checked for collisions. This can be done
using a global map, if it is available, or a local grid
computed on-line with the robots sensors (Pereira
et al., 2016).
3.3

Steering function

A correct and efficient implementation of the
steering function is essential to allow the use of
RRT* in real time, once function steer is called
O(V ) in each iteration of Algorithm 1. In the
version of RRT* used in this paper, its is assumed
that the steering function Steer(qi , qj ) finds a
differential constrained trajectory that starts in
qi and finishes in qj . More generic versions of
the algorithm allows the trajectory to finish in a
region around the final configuration (Karaman
et al., 2011). This is indeed a way to reduce the
complexity of the steering function, which includes
the determination of an optimal arrival time at
the final configuration. A solution to this problem assuming linear system dynamics is presented
in (Webb and van den Berg, 2013).

ISSN 2525-8311

x  v cos  ,
y  v sin  ,
   ,

3.4

(2)
  v ,

Trajectory cost function

In the methodology proposed in this paper, the
cost of a trajectory given by function TCost()
in Algorithm 1 is obtained by computing the functional in Equation (1). Since this functional depends on the vector field and on the derivative of
the trajectory, both dependent on the robots configuration, the computation of the exact value of
the functional in continuous time would be very
time consuming. A practical solution is then to
discretize the trajectory into small intervals and
assume that the both the derivative of the trajectory and the vector field are constant during
each interval. The integral in Equation (1) is then
replaced by a sum, which can computed in time
O(k), where k is the number of intervals.
3.5

Other considerations

In this paper, it is assumed that the vector field is
computed over a reduced version of the robots
configuration space composed by position only.
Therefore, for a planar robot with configuration
given by q  x, y, T , we assume that, given a
position (x, y), the vector field is constant for all
values of orientation . Orientation is also ignored
by functions Near() and Nearest(), which we
assume to apply an Euclidean distance function
over the linear components of the configuration.
However, it is important to observe that the
complete configuration (position and orientation)
is used in all other steps of the method since qnew
is sampled over a region of the complete configuration space, as explained in Subsection 3.2.
Another important consideration is related to
the query phase of RRT*, when the final trajectory will be determined. Since no goal configuration is specified by the problem, we grow a

252

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro
20

10

y(m)

y(m)

5
0

30

30

20

20

10

10

y(m)

15

0

0

-5

-10

-10

-10

-20

-20

-15

-30
-40

-20
-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

-30
-30

-20

tree that may slightly exceeds the limits of the
planning region given by radius r and, during
the query phase, choose, among the configurations
within distances (r  , r + ), where  is a small
constant, the one with the smallest cost to represent the final configuration.
Next section presents some simulations that
illustrate the proposed approach.
Simulations

We have implemented the proposed methodology
in C++ using OMPL (Sucan et al., 2012) and
ROS (Quigley et al., 2009) for Q  SE(2). Therefore, q  x, y, T . We assumed that the robot
can be modeled as Dubins vehicle with turning
radius   2 m. All simulations run in an Intel
Core i7-3.00GHz Linux computer.
In our first simulation, shown in Figure 1, we
have a robot in a large environments with a single
unmodeled obstacle (blue box). The robot starts
at configuration q0  25, 15, 0T . A vector field
was constructed over the environment to make the
robot to move on the y  5 line. Since the obstacle
was not known during the field computation, the
integral of the vector field (black trajectory) would
lead the robot to a collision. Using the proposed
methodology, the robot was able to construct an
optimal tree (shown by the blue lines) inside its
sensor radius, r  50 m (shown in yellow), and
find a feasible trajectory (shown in red) that both
avoids the obstacle and follow the vector field as
close as possible. This trajectory was computed
with tmax  2 s.
In our second set of simulations, we used the
vector field proposed by Goncalves et al. (2010)
for curve circulation. Curve circulation is among
the tasks that cannot be solved by RRT* alone
due to the lack of a goal position. We set the radius of the planning region to be r  10 m. In

10

20

30

-40

-30

-20

-10

x(m)

(a)

(b)

30

30

20

20

10

10

y(m)

y(m)

Figure 1 Illustrative example. A vector field (arrows) was computed without the knowledge of the
obstacle (blue box). Thus, the integral of the vector field (black) would lead the robot to a collision.
The proposed methodology uses an optimal search
tree (blue lines) to find a dynamically feasible,
and asymptotically optimal trajectory (red) that
avoids the obstacle and follows the vector field.

ISSN 2525-8311

0

x(m)

0

10

20

30

0

10

20

30

40

x(m)

4

-10

0

0

-10

-10

-20

-20

-30
-40

-30
-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

-40

-30

-20

-10

x(m)

x(m)

(c)

(d)

Figure 2 Circulation of curves. Effect of the execution time tmax . On the left tmax  1 s and
on the right tmax  5 s. (a)-(b) free workspace
(c)-(d) presence of unmodelled obstacles.
this simulation, the robot computes, for a fixed
amount of time tmax , a trajectory that starts at
q0 and finishes at the borders of the sampling region. Then, it follows 50 of the path and computes, for the same fixed amount of time tmax ,
a new path that starts at its current configuration and finishes at the borders of the new sampling region centered at the new start configuration. This is repeated until the end of the simulation. Figure 2 shows the results of the method
for tmax  1 s (figures (a) and (c)) and tmax  5 s
(figures (b) and (d)) with and without obstacles
(blue rectangles). Notice that, although all trajectories computed are dynamically feasible, the
quality of the trajectory increases if the method
has more time to execute. The trajectory in Figure 2(c), for example, has a loop at the bottom
right of the figure, which is removed in the result
in Figure 2(d), where more optimization time was
spent. A video of this simulation, which includes
the search trees for each step, can be found in
www.cpdee.ufmg.brcoromoviescba2016.
5

Conclusions

This paper presented a methodology to integrate
vector field methodologies with optimal motion
planners to allow the safe navigation of nonholonomic robots in partially unknown workspaces.
Simulated results shown the potentiality of the
method to control actual robots in tasks that cannot be solved by optimal motion planners alone.
Next steps of this research include the use of
the method to control ground and aerial mobile

253

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

robots working in urban environments in the presence of obstacles and people. To do so, the current
implementation needs to be speeded up to allow
better trajectories in less time. This can be done
by the proposition of new sampling approaches
such as the ones suggested in (Pereira et al., 2016)
and (Qureshi et al., 2013).
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Conselho Nacional
de Desenvolvimento Cientfico e Tecnologico
(CNPqBrazil), Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa
do Estado de Minas Gerais (FAPEMIGBrazil)
and National Science Foundation (NSFUSA).
References
Esposito, J. M. and Kumar, V. (2002). A method
for modifying closed-loop motion plans to
satisfy unpredictable dynamic constraints at
runtime, IEEE Intl. Conf. Robotics and Automation, pp. 16911696.
Frew, E. W., Lawrence, D. A. and Morris, S.
(2008). Coordinated standoff tracking of
moving targets using Lyapunov guidance vector fields, J. Guidance, Control, and Dynamics 31(2) 290306.
Goncalves, V. M., Pimenta, L. C. A., Maia, C. A.,
Dutra, B. C. O. and Pereira, G. A. S. (2010).
Vector fields for robot navigation along timevarying curves in n-dimensions, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 26(4) 647659.
Jeon, J., Cowlagi, R. V., Peters, S. C., Karaman,
S., Frazzoli, E., Tsiotras, P. and Iagnemma,
K. (2013). Optimal motion planning with
the half-car dynamical model for autonomous
high-speed driving, American Control Conf.,
pp. 188193.

LaValle, S. M. and Kuffner, J. J. (2001). Randomized kinodynamic planning, The Intl. J.
Robotics Research 20(5) 378400.
Loizou, S. G., Tanner, H. G., Kumar, V. and Kyriakopoulos, K. J. (2003). Closed loop motion
planning and control for mobile robots in uncertain environments, IEEE Conf. Decision
and Control, Vol. 3, pp. 29262931.
Owen, M., Beard, R. W. and McLain, T. W.
(2014). Implementing Dubins Airplane Paths
on Fixed-Wing UAVs, Handbook of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, pp. 16771701.
Pereira, G. A. S., Choudhury, S. and Scherer, S.
(2016). A framework for optimal repairing of
vector field-based motion plans, Intl. Conf.
Unmanned Aircraft Systems, pp. 261266.
Pereira, G. A. S., Pimenta, L. C. A., Chaimowicz, L., Fonseca, A. R., Almeida, D. S. C.,
Correa, L. Q., Mesquita, R. C. and Campos,
M. F. M. (2009). Robot navigation in multiterrain outdoor environments, The Intl. J.
Robotics Research 28(6) 685700.
Quigley, M., Conley, K., Gerkey, B. P., Faust, J.,
Foote, T., Leibs, J., Wheeler, R. and Ng,
A. Y. (2009). ROS an open-source robot
operating system, ICRA Workshop on Open
Source Software.
Qureshi, A. H., Iqbal, K. F., Qamar, S. M., Islam,
F., Ayaz, Y. and Muhammad, N. (2013). Potential guided directional-RRT* for accelerated motion planning in cluttered environments, IEEE Intl. Conf. Mechatronics and
Automation, pp. 519524.
Rimon, E. and Koditschek, D. E. (1992). Exact robot navigation using artificial potential functions, IEEE Trans. Robotics and Automation, 8(5) 501518.

Karaman, S. and Frazzoli, E. (2011). Samplingbased algorithms for optimal motion planning, The Intl. J. of Robotics Research
30(7) 846894.

Sohn, K. and Oh, P. (2015). Optimization of humanoids motions under multiple constraints
in vehicle ingress task, Intelligent Service
Robotics 9(1) 3148.

Karaman, S., Walter, M. R., Perez, A., Frazzoli,
E. and Teller, S. (2011). Anytime motion
planning using the RRT*, IEEE Intl. Conf.
Robotics and Automation, pp. 14781483.

Sucan, I. A., Moll, M. and Kavraki, L. E. (2012).
The Open Motion Planning Library, IEEE
Robotics  Automation Magazine 19(4) 72
82. httpompl.kavrakilab.org.

Khatib, O. (1986). Real-time obstacle avoidance
for manipulators and mobile robots, The Intl.
J. Robotics Research 5(1) 9098.

Webb, D. J. and van den Berg, J. (2013). Kinodynamic RRT* Asymptotically optimal motion planning for robots with linear dynamics, IEEE Intl. Conf. Robotics and Automation, pp. 50545061.

Kuwata, Y., Karaman, S., Teo, J., Frazzoli, E.,
How, J. P. and Fiore, G. (2009). Real-time
motion planning with applications to autonomous urban driving, IEEE Trans. Control Systems Technology 17(5) 11051118.

ISSN 2525-8311

254