XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

LONGITUDINAL AIRCRAFT RESPONSE ANALYSIS BASED ON SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION
TECHNIQUES
JOEL L. C. REIS*, DIMAS A. DUTRA*, RICARDO L. U. F. PINTO*
*

Centro de Estudos Aeronáuticos - Departamento de Engenharia Mecânica
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais
Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627, 31270-907, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brasil

E-mails joellreis@ufmg.br, dimasad@ufmg.br, utsch@demec.ufmg.br
Abstract The dynamic response of an aircraft in its longitudinal plane has two very distinctive modes short-period and phugoid.
The short-period has natural frequency and damping coefficient values which relates it to typical maneuvers in a normal operation.
Thus, it is important its determination by flight tests to verify the aircraft flight quality. Generally, these flight tests are carried out
through traditional methods. However, such procedures can be improved both for how the aircraft is excited as for the method used
for analyzing the acquired data. This paper propose a new methodology to analyze the short-period mode through flight test techniques, making use of a 3-2-1-1 maneuver. For data reduction, system identification techniques are used, which are based on the
data acquired during flight and on the aircraft equations of motion. The system identification method used here has several statistical properties of a good estimator, thus, the estimated values converge in probability to the true values. Therefore, it is understood that the analysis of the aircraft response by the proposed method has a greater precision to represent the characteristics of the
dynamic stability mode.
Keywords Flight tests, system identification, short-period, aircraft response, output error method.
Resumo A resposta_dinâmica de uma aeronave em seu plano longitudinal possui dois modos distintos curto-período e fugóide.
O curto-período possui valores de frequência natural e coeficiente de amortecimento que o relacionam a manobras típicas em uma
operação normal. Assim, é importante sua determinação através de ensaios_em_voo para verificar a qualidade de voo da aeronave.
Geralmente esses ensaios são realizados através de métodos tradicionais. No entanto, tais procedimentos podem ser melhorados
tanto na forma como a aeronave é excitada como no método utilizado para analisar os dados coletados. Esse artigo propõe uma
nova metodologia para analisar o modo curto-período através de técnicas de ensaio em voo, utilizando a manobra 3-2-1-1. Para a
redução dos dados, técnicas de identificação_de_sistemas são utilizadas, as quais são baseadas nos dados coletados durante o voo e
nas equações de movimento da aeronave. O método de identificação_de_sistemas utilizado aqui possui diversas propriedades estatísticas de um bom estimador, assim, os valores estimados convergem em probabilidade para os valores verdadeiros. Portanto,
entende-se que a análise da resposta_da_aeronave pelo método proposto possui uma maior precisão para representar as características do modo de estabilidade dinâmica.
Palavras-chave .

1

Introduction

The response of an aircraft due to the pilots commands or wind gusts are associated with flight safety
factors and the crews workload. In this way, the analysis of the dynamic behavior of an aircraft in flight is
a very important task. Due to it, the natural frequency
and the damping coefficient values must be known for
each dynamic stability mode of an aircraft. In the beginning of a new aircraft design, these parameters can
be calculated based on wind tunnel tests or on semiempirical aerodynamic analysis. However, to verify
the flight quality of an aircraft, it is necessary to make
a dynamic stability analysis from data collected in
flight tests (Kimberlin, 2003, Chapter 22).
General fixed-wing aircraft have five well-known
dynamic stability modes, two longitudinal and three
lateral-directional. The longitudinal responses are denoted long-period (or phugoid) and short-period,
where the latter is characterized by higher values of
natural frequency and damping coefficient when compared to the phugoid. Thus, the aeronautical regulations are more stringent about the short-period characteristics, since the phugoid has a slower response and
is most easily controlled by the pilot. To the short-period analysis based on flight tests Kimberlin (2003,
Chap. 23) and Ward (1996, Sec. 9.1) propose a simple
ISSN 2525-8311

methodology, which describes methods to excite the
aircraft in this mode during flight test and to make the
data reduction using graphical methods. This methodology has been widely applied and shows satisfactory
results (Nicolosi, 2010), however, the graphical methods used in data reduction can show uncertainties,
since they depends of the engineers individual interpretation.
In this paper we propose a new methodology for
short-period natural frequency and damping coefficient determination based on system identification
method denominated Output Error Method (Jategaonkar, 2015 Klein, 2006), which is shown to be a better
alternative for data analysis than the traditional graphical methods.
2 Methodology
Aircraft dynamic analysis during flight tests is
done through data acquisition (linear speed, angular
speed, Euler angles, etc.) while inputting specific maneuvers in the commands. Each maneuver aims to excite the aircraft in a specific dynamic mode, which can
be interpreted from the reading of the acquired data.
This paper proposes a new methodology for aircraft short-period response analysis based on system

762

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

identification techniques. Such techniques have statistical properties that produce results with higher reliability. The identification method used here is the Output Error Method (OEM), which use the flight data
and the aircraft equations of motion to characterize the
dynamic behavior of the vehicle. The proposed methodology is compared with the traditional approach by
validation of the models against a different realization
of the same maneuver.

assumed as a continuous system and with constant
mass ii) the Earth curvature is neglected, that is, the
Earth is assumed as a flat surface iii) the aircraft is
assumed to be a rigid body iv) the aircraft mass distribution is assumed constant along the time, which
implies that the moments and products of inertia can
also be assumed as constant in time v) the aircraft is
symmetrical along the
plane, which allows decoupling of the motion in longitudinal and lateral-directional.
Modelling the aerodynamic, propulsive and gravitational forces and moments acting in the aircraft and
assuming the condition of small perturbations in flight
(Schmidt, 1998, Sec. 4.5  Pamadi, 1998, Sec. 4.3.4),
we obtain the following linearized matrix formulation
for the longitudinal motion,
(1)

Figure 1. Comparison between methodologies for short-period
analysis

Figure 1 summarizes flight data analysis using
traditional graphical methods and using the proposed
method based on system identification.

!

And



2.1 Aircraft Equations of Motion
The aircraft equation of motion describes the vehicle behavior in flight and is used for the parameter
estimation process through the system identification
methods. They are derived based on three reference
frames, which are Earth-based (or Navigation) frame,
Body-based frame and Wind (or Stability) frame. The
Navigation frame has its origin in the Earth surface
and is adopted as an inertial reference. The Bodybased axes has its origin at the aircraft gravity center
( ), as shown in Figure 2. The Wind axes, also with
its origin at the
, are related with the airspeed direction (Schmidt, 1998, Sec. 1.2.7 Pamadi, 1998, Sec.
4.2.4). The component of the linear velocity vector ,
and
and the components of the angular velocity
vector , and are related to the Body-based axes
, and , respectively.

Figure 2. Linear velocity, angular velocity and aerodynamic angles

The aircraft equations of motion are obtained
adopting the following assumptions i) the aircraft is

ISSN 2525-8311

!

Where

4


1
 () 0
 *+,- 0
 () 
()

!

! 
55

65

95

0

55

"

"

56

66

96

0

65

3

0

69

99

1

(2)

95

58

68

98

0

0



3

In Eq.1, , and are the small perturbation in
, and , respectively and is the small perturbation angle of attack.
is the elevator deflection,
which is responsible for the control in the longitudinal
plane. , () , () , *+,- and () are the bias and
equilibrium values. The elements of matrix and
are composed by aerodynamic and propulsive dimensional coefficients (Pamadi, 1998, Sec. 6.2).
In stable aircrafts, the matrix has two pairs of
complex conjugate eigenvalues. Each pair represents
one free response mode of the longitudinal dynamic
stability. Generally, the long-period (phugoid) mode
has low values of damping coefficient and natural frequency, on the other hand the short-period mode is
characterized by relatively high values of damping coefficient (<> ) and natural frequency (?@,> ). Moreover, while the short-period is predominantly observed
through and , the phugoid is observed through

763

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

and (Schmidt, 1998, Sec. 6.2.1). One example of
these roots are presented in the complex plane shown
in Figure 3. The pilot can easily correct the phugoid,
which has a slower response. However, the short-period, which has faster responses related to common
maneuvers in flight, can turn the operation workload
and unsafe during operation. Therefore, the short-period must be determined, e.g., using flight test techniques.

presence of noise. Both methods were applied, with
the parameters obtained with the MS fit being used as
the initial guess for the NLS optimization.

Figure 4. Measurements for the Maximum Slope Method

2.3 System Identification Methods

Figure 3. Locations of the phugoid and short-period roots

2.2 Flight Tests and Data Reduction
The short-period analysis based flight tests is
used to verify the compatibility with the aircraft design data. A classic methodology used in some projects (Nicolosi, 2010) is proposed by Kimberlin
(2003) and also by Ward (1996), where maneuvers to
excite the short-period and graphical methods for data
reduction are suggested. Kimberlin (2003) and Ward
(1996) indicate the Doublet maneuver, since it has the
advantage to excite the short-period, suppressing the
phugoid mode. However, Jategaonkar (2015, Sec.
2.3.2) shows that the excitation 3-2-1-1 is preferable,
since it is less sensitive to the C choice. Then, in this
paper the 3-2-1-1 maneuver is chosen for short-period
analysis.
The Maximum Slope Method (MS) is the main
method for short-period data reduction suggested by
Kimberlin (2003, Sec. 23.6). This method is based on
the assumption that the natural response of the aircraft
is dominated by a damped sinusoid (Eq. 3)
DCE

FG HIJ K cos O?@ P1

<6 C

QR

() (3)

Consequently, after the input returns to the equilibrium condition, the natural frequency ?@,> and
damping coefficient <> can be obtained from a curve
fit. The MS uses features of the graph, such as the
maximum point, the minimum point and the maximum inclination of the tangent line (shown in Figure
4) to obtain such fit. The curve fit can also be done
using optimization methods such as the Nonlinear
Least Squares (NLS) method (Hamming, 1973),
which is more easily automated and more robust to the

ISSN 2525-8311

The short-period data reduction proposed in this
paper is based on a system identification technique
known as Output Error Method (Jategaonkar, 2015
Klein, 2006). This method is capable to estimate the
parameters of the matrices and based on the data
collected during the flight tests and on the aircraft
equations of motion. Thus, the short-period characteristics are obtained through the evaluation of the matrix eigenvalues.
In the Output Error Method (OEM) the system is
assumed deterministic, that is, it is assumed that there
is only noise (gaussian, white and zero mean) in the
system output. The OEM is also called responsecurve-fitting method, since it is based in the measurement of the distance between simulated responses of
the system, for a given parameter group, and the output measured values. The vector of optimum parameters is that one which gives the highest probability to
the measurements.
For the parameter estimation process, is used the
system, which represents the longitudinal motion of
the aircraft (Eq.1 and Eq. 2).
The cost function, based in Maximum Likelihood
principle, is
1
U W
2 V

SD E

W
lnDdetD EE
2

WUV
(4)
lnD2E
2

Where UV denotes the number of output equations, W the number of discrete time points at which
the measurements are available and the covariance
matrix of the residuals, given by
1
 DC E
W
a

b5

DC E DC E

DC E

3

(5)

In Eq. 5, DC E is the measured value at C (c
1,2,  , W), which is the time point at each measurement. The OEM estimation procedure is summarized
in the following (Jategaonkar, 2015, Sec. 4.4)
1.

An initial set of parameters ( e ) is chosen. In
this work, they come from the Equation Error

764

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

2.

3.

4.

Method estimation (Jategaonkar, 2015,
Chap.6).
System outputs  and residuals D E are
computed. The measurement noise covariance matrix is also estimated.
The cost function SD E is minimized with respect to the parameters by applying nonlinear optimization methods, such as GaussNewton.
Step 2 iterates until SD E reach its minimum
value.
3 Results and Discussion

The methodology was applied to flight test data
from the VFW-Fokker614ATTAS (Advanced Technologies Testing Aircraft System) aircraft, from the
DLR (German Aerospace Center). The data is available as supplementary material from Jategaonkar
(2015), and was kindly ceded by the author. A data
acquisition system was used to register the aircraft behavior over time during the execution of a 3-2-1-1 maneuver. The recorded data includes , , ,  and .
The same maneuver is performed twice at the same
flight condition, creating two datasets, where one is
used for the estimation and the other for the validation.

Figure 6. Damping coefficient and natural frequency determination. Adapted from Ward (1996, Sec. 9.2)

Then, we have that ?U . k 2.097. The characteristics of the short-period based in the graphical approach are described in Table 2.
nop
qr,op rads

Table 2. Short-period characteristics (Maximum Slope Method).

0.48
2.330

The MS method assumed that natural response of
is characterized by an exponentially damped curve,
in the form of the Eq. 3, where DCE represents in
time. Figure 7 shows the raw data and the curve fitting
obtained with MS method based on Eq. 3 and on the
parameters in Table 2.

3.1 Graphical Analysis
In agreement with the Maximum Slope Method
(Kimberlin, 2003 Ward, 1996), the short-period analysis must be done by the observation of the values of
in the aircraft response, since this mode can be predominantly represented by behavior.
The measured values for the analysis (Figure 5)
are described in Table 1.

Figure 7. Maximum Slope Fit

The NLS fit to the same dataset is shown in Fig.
8 and Table 3.
nop
qr,op rads

Table 3. Short-period characteristics (NLS).

0.5078
2.4762

Figure 5. MS graphical features

Table 1. Measured MS graphical features.
g

3.258

gh

0.381

i

0.90

In the MS method the values of natural frequency
and damping coefficient are determined using Figure
6, based on the data shown in Table 1.

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 8. Nonlinear Least Squares Fitting

765

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

3.2 Parameter Estimation Analysis
In this paper, the proposed method for determining the characteristic of the short-period mode is based
on the estimation of parameters +w , +w , , () , () ,
th
*+,- and () of the 4 order system (Eq. 1) from the
data acquired in the tests. Figure 9 shows the result of
the estimation for the first dataset.

methods, the values for these parameters which minimize the RMS error were obtained with the GaussNewton algorithm and used for in comparison. For the
OEM method, the free simulation of the identified
model was used, with the estimated parameter for matrices and and with a new estimation for the equilibrium parameters, since it is a new dataset.

Figure 10. Maximum Slope Method Validation

Figure 9. OEM estimation results

Figure 11. Nonlinear Least Squares Validation

The matrix estimated has two pair of complex
conjugate roots. The pair representing the short-period
is one that has the higher real absolute value. Thus, the
roots representing the short-period are
x>

1.2965  2.1895

Therefore, the short-period natural frequency and
damping coefficient are given in Table 3.
nop
qr,op rads

Table 4. Short-period characteristics (OEM).

0.5095
2.5446

3.3 Validation
To validate and compare the different approaches, a second dataset of the same maneuver, under the same flight condition, was used. The root mean
squared error of the angle of attack expected by the
different methods was used to as the metric of comparison. For the MS and NLS methods, the amplitude
F and phase angle Q of the damped sinusoid (Eq. 3)
vary in different datasets. To be favorable to these

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 12. Output Error Method Validation

The Root Mean Squared Error for each method is
shown in Table 5.
Table 5. Root Mean Squared Error for validation
Method

 DE

MS

NLS

OEM

0.0911

0.0454

0.0364

We observe that the data analysis using graphical
method (MS) can be improved by applying an exponential curve fitting procedure (NLS), instead of performing the analysis in the raw data. However, for
both procedures, it is assumed that after the maneuver

766

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

the pilot put the stick back to the equilibrium position,
which is not always the regular situation. Besides,
they assume a 2nd order model.
The use of the proposed method, where the shortperiod response characteristics are obtained by the
OEM, we expect more reliable results, since this
method can handle both process and measurement
noise. Furthermore, it has several statistical properties
of a good estimator, that is, the properties of maximum likelihood estimates implies that the estimated
values converge in probability to the true values. Besides that, the property of asymptotic normality implies that the estimates obtained from different datasets corresponding to different experiments are clustered around the true value with a normal distribution
(Jategaonkar, 2015). Therefore, we observe that the
short-period characteristics from Table 4 must be
closer to the real values, than those obtained by the
other procedures.
4 Conclusion
General fixed-wing aircraft have two well-known
modes of dynamic stability, among which is the
short-period. The magnitude of its natural frequency
and damping coefficient can be related to typical maneuvers during flight, which may render in an unsafe
operation. Thus, it is important to analyze the characteristics of short-period mode through flight tests.
Some methods are proposed for both excitation of
the aircraft in flight, and for the analysis of the acquired data. The Doublet maneuver is proposed for the
mode excitation and the data reduction is based on the
use of values over time after application of the input.
From these data it is possible to measure some parameters and determine the values of the natural frequency
and damping coefficient for the short-period. The
graphical analysis can be improved by using curve fitting, however, it is noted, even with such improvements, that these methods dont have the same probability qualities such as the system identifications
methods.
In the proposed method, we have chosen to excite
the aircraft using the maneuver 3-2-1-1, which due to
its characteristics make it more indicated for testing.
For data reduction, it is proposed the use of system
identification techniques which are based on data obtained in the tests and on the aircraft equations of motion. Obtaining the short-period features using the
OEM has several advantages when compared to the
graphical method, which can be described as follows
 The OEM is considered as a "good estimator", which essentially implies in unbiased
estimates, asymptotic consistency, asymptotic normality and asymptotic efficiency
(Jategaonkar, 2015, Sec. 4.3).
 The short-period analysis is not only based
on values, but on all variables for longitudinal equations of motion.
 A larger part of the data acquired in the maneuver is used.
ISSN 2525-8311



The system inputs (change in the aircraft
controls) can be done more generally, and
there is no need to return the stick to the initial equilibrium point after the application of
the maneuver, which simplifies the execution
of tests for the pilot.
 It can deal with higher fluctuations in the input.
 It can join different data sets to find an
unique model
 The analysis of longitudinal motion through
the system identification techniques allows
the determination of all modes of dynamic
stability (since the required maneuvers are
applied), unlike the graphical method where
only one mode is analyzed.
 The OEM can be used for analysis of high
order  nonlinear models.
Therefore, it follows that the proposed techniques
based on system identification results in a more accurate characterization of the short-period mode, generating more reliable results for the analysis of dynamic
stability of the aircraft.
References
Dutra, D. (2010). Identificação de Sistema para uma
Aeronave Leve. Undergraduate. Federal University of Minas Gerais.
Hamming, R. (1973). Numerical Methods for
Scientists and Engineers. 2nd ed. New York
Dover Publications.
Jategaonkar, R. (2015). Flight Vehicle System Identification. Reston, VA American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
Kimberlin, R. (2003). Flight Testing of Fixed-Wing
Aircraft. Reston, VA American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Klein, V. and Morelli, E. (2006). Aircraft System Identification. Reston, VA American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Nicolosi, F., De Marco, A. and Della Vecchia, P.
(2010). Parameter Estimation and Flying Qualities of a Twin-Engine CS23FAR23 Certified
Light Aircraft. AIAA Atmospheric Flight Mechanics Conference.
Pamadi, B. (1998). Perfomance, Stability, Dynamics,
and Control of Airplanes. Hampton AIAA.
Schmidt, L. (1998). Introduction to Aircraft Flight
Dynamics. Reston, Va. American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Ward, D., Strganac, T. and Niewoehner, R. (1996). Introduction to Flight Test Engineering. 2nd ed.
Dubuque, Iowa KendallHunt.

767