Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

WHEN AGENTS MEET MANUFACTURING PARADIGMS AND
IMPLEMENTATIONS
Andre Cavalcante, Joao Peixoto, Carlos Pereira


Federal University of Amazon,
Electronics and Telecommunication Department,
Manaus, AM, Brazil.


Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul,
National Industry Service,
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.



Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul,
Eletric Engineer Department,
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

Emails andrecavalcante@ufam.edu.br, joao.peixoto@senairs.org.br,
emailcpereira@ece.ufrgs.br
Resumo Nos dias de hoje o grande desafio da manufatura e a customizacao em massa de produtos. Para
se conseguir este objetivo, diversos paradigmas tem sido propostos como Reconfigurable Manufacturing System
(RMS), Bionic Manufacturing System (BMS), Holonic Manufacturing System (HMS) e Evolvable Production
System (EPS). Existem alguns pontos em comum e diferencas importantes entre esses paradigmas, e essas
diferencas direcionam a escolha do melhor paradigma de implementacao a ser usado em um caso real. Este
artigo apresenta um pequeno resumo sobre estes paradigmas, analisa-os com o foco na implementacao, e propoe
uma abordagem para implementar um cenario de mundo real de uma linha de montagem piloto no Brasil.
Palavras-chave



Abstract Nowadays the great trend for the manufacturing is the mass customization of goods. To achieve
that goal several paradigms were proposed, like Reconfigurable Manufacturing System (RMS), Bionic Manufacturing System (BMS), Holonic Manufacturing System (HMS), and Evolvable Production System (EPS). There
are some common points and some important differences between these paradigms, and these differences direct
the choice of the best implementation paradigm to be used in a real case. This paper shows a small review about
these paradigms, analyse them with focus on implementation and proposes an approach to implement a real
world scenario of a pilot assembly line in Brazil.
Keywords

1

Manufacturing, Assembly System, EAS, EPS, Multi-Agent Systems

Introduction

The most important challenge of the current assembly systems is the need for continuous change
(or adaptation) of production system due to internal and external changes (Westkaemper, 2006).
These changes can be made by users, other systems in the supply chain, environmental or social
constraints, etc. (Randall et al., 2007). As shown
in Fig. 1, while the product development time
was reduced by computer aided design (CAD) and
other techniques, the production phase was not.
So the challenge turns to fast (re)configuration
for assembly lines to allow a large number of
customized products (Koren et al., 1999 Barata
et al., 2005).
To achieve the goal of rapid re-configuration,
some paradigms have been developed Flexible
Manufacturing System (FMS) in later 80s Bionic
Manufacturing Systems BMS by (Ueda, 1992) and
other Holonic Manufacturing Systems (HMS) by
(Gou et al., 1998 Van Brussel et al., 1998 Bussmann and McFarlane, 1999 Babiceanu and Chen,
2006) and others, Reconfigurable Manufacturing
Systems (RMS) by (Koren et al., 1999 Mehrabi

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

et al., 2000) and others Evolvable Assembly
Systems (EAS) and Evolvable Production System (EPS) by (Onori, 2002 Barata et al., 2006
Ribeiro et al., 2010) and others.
These paradigms have common points, as the
use of small and smart devices that can be aggregated to perform a process, and significant differences. Some have the concept of manufacturing
agent.
However, the concept of agent is not unique,
nor there is a common point in the polls depending on the field that is applied, the term agent has
some differences. For manufacturing, an agent is
an autonomous entity that does some action on
the assembly line and can cooperate with other
agents.
Some of these paradigms have been prototyped in a few years ago (see Table ??), but the
lack of implementation in the industries still remain, as well as mature tools. An effort to fill
these gaps is required and some desired features
such as self-organization and evolution are to be
inserted in a real scenario.
An example of evolution in manufacturing is

957

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.
Current practice
Product A - lead time
Design  Build of
Manufacturing System

rump up

Produce A for a long time
timeline

Future practice
Product C - lead time

Product B - lead time
Product A - lead time
Design  Build of
Manufac. System

rump up

Reconfiguration

Produce A

rump
up

Produce
A and B

rump
up

Produce
B e C
timeline

Figure 1 Manufacturing System Evolution. Fonte (Koren et al., 1999)
the autonomous changing of the production system by entry (or exit) of a new type of product to
be produced.
To try to fill the gaps, this paper gives a brief
summary these paradigms, in Section 2, which
will point out similarities and differences between
them and justify the choice of EAS as an approach
to implement a real-world scenario. In Section 3
is shown a more specific study on the agent-based
approach to achieve the responsiveness of assembly system and a proposal for an implementation
in a real world scenario. In the end, in Section 4
is shown our conclusions.
2

Recent manufacturing system
paradigms

Manufacturing system has evolved from craft production with low volume, high variety and general purpose machines to production lines, dedicated machines and large enterprise, that enable
the mass production (ElMaraghy, 2005).
Mass production brought the concept of a
manufacturing with a viewpoint centred on Programmable Logical Controllers (PLC), which operates in a loop
(i) read all inputs
(ii) execute pre-defined logic (the process) to
generate the outputs from the inputs and
(iii) trigger the outputs conform to the processing logic.
As this sequence is repeated continuously,
there is an increase in gain quality, face the same
process run every time. But there is no flexibility
in the process. If a product requires customization, new process must be designed and implemented in the PLC (of course that this loop can
be made inside a PC or other hardware and it can
be applied at several level of the enterprise).

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

To overcome the difficulty of reprogramming,
an approach named Flexible Manufacturing System (FMS) was developed (ElMaraghy, 2005). In
flexible system, a flexible machine is built to support all the variations to the process considered.
In general, a flexible machine is formed by one
or more controlled machines by Control Numerical Computerized (CNC), and some transport systems that allows the product under production
are moved from one machine to another, following pre-defined process. If required, the product
is moved to the machine responsible for only that
part of the process and a customization is done.
Flexible machines may be expansive (comparatively with other production costs) and requires intensive programming. As time to market has been steadily decreasing, the task of reprogramming the machines adds cost to the production process. Reconfigurable Manufacturing
System (RMS)(Mehrabi et al., 2000) tries to deal
with these limitations by making use of hardware
and software reconfigurable, but with only relative
success. Most recent paradigms were proposed to
superposes these deficiencies.
2.1

Bionic Manufacturing System - BMS

Production system inspired by biological systems
is an approach that draws a parallel between the
biological properties and manufacturing systems.
The concept was created by (Ueda, 1992) who
noted that biological organisms can adapt to reorganize itself, self-expand and evolve. This concept was developed during the 90s, in order that
the characteristics of biological systems, such as
autonomy and spontaneous behavior, were copied
to manufacturing systems. BMS is the combination of multiple autonomous systems, hierarchically related to accomplish a particular function (Tharumarajah et al., 1998).
A work more recent, (Ueda, 2007) shows that
BMS can be seen as a system divided into small

958

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Order
holon
Process
execution
knowledge

Product
knowledge

Product
holon
Process
knowledge

Resource
holon

Figure 2 Holonic Manufacturing System (HMS)
Reference Architecture. Fonte (Van Brussel et al.,
1998)

parts, each implements autonomous services that
interact and share, to perform a larger task. The
interactions are achieved through the exchange
of DNA-type (hereditary) and BN-type (learning
process) information. In fact, the flow of material information (DNA type) and the workflow information (DNA-type) between the entities (BNtype) (robots, machines, etc.) sets a product
(DNA + BN). If one makes adjusts in this flow of
information the system can react to that changes.
The process of making this adjustment is known as
synthesis problem. The similarities between production systems and biological systems are also
subject of (Gu et al., 2011).
The autonomous cells, which synthesize bodies by exchange information, can be seen as simple
autonomous agents.
2.2

Holonic Manufacturing System - HMS

Another approach that has recently emerged is
called Holonic Manufacturing System (HMS).
This paradigm is based on the concept of holon. A
holon is a whole in a  part approach (Alsterman
and Onori, 2005). HMS has the following principles (i) a system is a whole, and all of it is formed
by parts, but there is no concept of all this, because each can be viewed as a whole, (ii) complex
systems will evolve from simple systems.
Following the traditional approach of divide
and conquer, it divides the manufacturing system
into parts that can be easily managed, but the
concept of holon goes further A holon is building block of an autonomous and cooperative production system for processing, transport, storage
andor validating information and physical objects (Babiceanu and Chen, 2006).
Another important concept in the HMS is
autonomy, that is, the capacity of an element
for creating and controlling its level of strategies.
Note that this concept is the same as autonomous
agent.
Finally, HMS define the concept of holoarchy
as a system of holons that cooperate to achieve a
goal, and can expose functionality to other holons.
(Van Brussel et al., 1998) proposes a reference architecture for HMS, called PROSA, which
is the reference implementation with three types

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

of holons (i) Order holon, (ii) product holon e
(iii) resource holon, as shown in Fig. 2.
The approach allows HMS adaptability
through different levels of aggregation of holons,
or by specialization. However, its concern is to
decouple the system structure of the control algorithm, enabling the complexity management and
fast reprogramming, if necessary. But there is
an initiative of real self-organizing, because the
paradigm does not address the mechanisms of (re)configuration. However, some flexibility is possible through the cooperation between agents, with
disposal of skills each others. But there is no formal definition of how the system will evolve to
some substantial changes occur in the system.

2.3

Evolvable Assembly System - EAS or Evolvable Product System - EPS

The first concepts of EASEPS found in the literature were used by (Onori, 2002) and (Alsterman
and Onori, 2005), but the notion of evolvability
is older, as shown in (Gagliardi et al., 1996), not
specifically applied to assembly systems.
The current concepts are based on the need
to make changes to system where the environment changes, where the necessity of productions suddenly change. In (Onori et al., 2006)
found that EPS) is based on simple systems, reconfigurable, with specific tasks elements (system
modules), allows a continuous evolution the skills
of modules. More recently, (Frei et al., 2009)
showed that a assembly system Evolutionary
(EAS) system is assembly that can evolve along
with product and assembly process. (Ribeiro
et al., 2008) makes a study of the EASEPS as Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). Multi-Agent
Systems (MAS) is the implementation paradigm
for the EAS, proposed in this paper.
EAS can be defined as a dynamic, selforganizing and evolving assembly system, consisting of interconnected modules and able to change
its structure in accordance with the relevant environmental changes. EPS can be defined also as
a dynamic self-organized and scalable production
system that can support the integration of modular components, product and process changes, demand fluctuations, insertion, removal and replacement of components in its normal operation.
How it can be seen, EAS and EPS have similar
concepts, except for the company level EAS is
about device or cell levels and EPS is about the
factory.
The interest here is by an implementation
of a true evolvability, that permit fast reconfiguration (or no time at all to make reconfiguration). To achieve this, we need to characterize selforganization, evolvability and their properties.

959

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

2.4

Self-organization and Evolvability of a System

A specific study on organization and selforganizing systems in a modern approach applied to machines, started with (Ashby, 1962).
Recently, (De Wolf and Holvoet, 2005) and
(Serugendo et al., 2008) returned to the subject.
Ashby shows that to change the structure of
a system is necessary another system. The expanded system thus formed is evolvable in the
time. This means that the system can change its
structure, this is, the finite state machine that will
defined it. A subset of all possible states is defined
as organization.
If a system can change its organization without external control, then the system is called selforganized. For example, the system can be constructed to find the best set of states to makes a
particular task, as a kind of sets of possible states.
If the system that change the base system is
not considered part of the whole assembly system,
it can not be considered self-organized. Therefore,
the concept of self-organization relates to the limits of the system. In fact, the properties of the organization and self-organization of a given system
are properties defined by observer of the system
and they are not intrinsic properties.
A special property of an evolvable and selforganized system is plug-ability, as defined by
(Onori et al., 2006), this is, the system capacity to
accept insertion or removal of components in their
normal operation, without the necessity of to stop
the system or turn off it.
An evolvable system can not be neither completely deterministic neither completely random.
A system in between is called dynamic_system.
The same way, self-optimized systems are
those able to search the best solution for their
structure. From a given measure or goal, the system is able to perform some kind of optimization
of its properties.
There are no mechanisms defined to enable
plug-ability in the BMS and HMS, but this is one
of the most important aspects in an EPS.
Although all paradigms can be used to make
an real world implementation, as the paradigm
EPS define mechanisms for self-organization,
evolvability and specially, plug-ability, it was chosen to guide our case study. However, we need
choose the implementation strategy to be used.
3

Multi-agent approach implementation

A paradigm of implementing an EPS require some
features
 to be able of componentization
 to be easily programmable
 to grant heterogeneous entity

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

 to enable cooperation among entities
 each entity must have independence against
others
 each entity can operate pro-actively.
The usual approach for cooperation between entities is Service Oriented Architecture
(SOA)(Ribeiro et al., 2008). SOA has componentization, it is relative easy programming (because
of tools ready for use), heterogeneous entities and
easy cooperation between the entities.
Other approach is Multi-Agent Systems
(MAS)(Ribeiro et al., 2008), which also has
componentization, programming relatively easy,
heterogeneous entities, cooperation between the
agencies and pro-active operation.
There are some recent research in the European Union (EU) using SOA or MAS to enable
self-organization, self-adaptation and flexibility in
manufacturing, as
 FP7 NMP COSMOS - COSt-driven adaptive factory based on MOdular Self-contained
factory units (httpcordis.europa.eu) autonomous behaviour of the factory units multilayer decentralised control control in three
interconnected levels interoperable connectivity with factory units equipmentdevices
local intelligence (self-adaptation to different parts conditions without human intervention) collaboration among equipmentdevices to complete specific tasks
 FP7 IMC AESOP  ArchitecturE for Service Oriented Process  Monitoring and
Control (httpcordis.europa.eu) real-time
web_services, interoperability, plug and play,
self-adaptation, reliability, cost-effectiveness,
energy-awareness, high-level cross-layer integration and cooperation, event propagation,
aggregation and management
 FP6 IST SOCRADES  Service-Oriented
Cross-layer
infRAstructure
for
Distributed
smart
Embedded
deviceS
(httpwww.socrades.eu) development of
a comprehensive device-level SOA infrastructure for encapsulating intelligence and
sensing or actuating skills as services, as well
as to specify associated frameworks for management and orchestration of device-level
services definition of a methodology for describing services with semantic mark-up that
can be interpreted and processed by agents
for the discovery, selection and composition
of resources
 FP7 PEOPLE COLLIS.EUS  Soft
Collaborative
Intelligent
Systems
(httpcordis.europa.eu)
soft-computing
techniques have been successfully applied

960

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

to analyse complex systems operating in
uncertain and unstructured environments.
Their ability to develop implicit and explicit
models of system behaviour combined with
capabilities to represent the state of knowledge of interacting computational entities,
has led to a number of approaches that apply
these techniques to develop multi-agent
systems
 FP6
IST
EUPASS

Evolvable
Ultra-Precision
Assembly
Systems
(httpcordis.europa.eu) MAS architecture
for reconfiguration of equipmenmodules
driven by a set of production requirements
defined in a Assembly system design ontology specification of a new agent model
to address the specific needs of precision
modular assembly systems catering both
for physical and logical constraints of the
modules
 FP7 NMP GRACE  InteGration of pRocess and quAlity Control using multi-agEnt
technology (httpcordis.europa.eu) development of an architecture integrating process and quality control, development of
self-adaptation and self-optimization mechanisms, development of modular and adaptive
testing systems, prototype validation
 FP7 NMP IDEAS  Instantly Deployable Evolvable Assembly Systems
(httpwww.ideas-project.eu) embedding
of a MAS environment into industrial controllers to explore the real application and
validation of the domain at device level.
The advantage of MAS over SOA is that MAS
permit the autonomous execution of their entities. How an agent has its own execution thread,
each entity becomes an active subject in the system, capable of starting events, while SOA entities are passive subjects, which only responds to
external requests. A full development about SOA
and MAS applied to manufacturing can be seen in
(Ribeiro et al., 2008).
Therefore, as MAS seems most promising
as implementation paradigm to implement EPS
manufacturing paradigm, it is the chosen.
3.1

Implementation of EAS

An EAS is formed by a plethora of small intelligent devices, which provides some functionalities
that can be composed in the assembly process of
several different products. The assembly process
consists of a meeting of these functionalities. Each
functionality is called a skill and the agent that
can execute such functionality is called Mechatronic Agent (MA). Therefore, an EAS is formed
by various mechatronic agents that exposes a set
of skills to the system.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Figure 3 SRMS plant
A Mechatronic Agent has some features
 has an unique identification
 may exchange messages to form coalitions
 has one or more skills (see definition below)
 has knowledge about itself and about environmental interest variables, for example, its
neighbourhood, physical localization, etc.
A Mechatronic Agent (MA) must have at least
one skill, but can have more. If it has more than
one skill, he has more of one reponsibility in the
system and can do more than one activity.
A skill can contain other skills (or sub-skills).
A skill that contains other skills is called a composite skill. The composing skills forms a workflow,
and its execution is the basis of formation of an
agent coalition.
An EAS has the control the system under in
the pallet view point, through the mechanism of
formation of coalitions. The product contains the
workflow of the assembly process, as a skills composition, and directs the production process. This
inversion of control, where the product contains
process intelligence, compared with the standard
approach in PLC view, where the tools contains
the process intelligence, is the key to enable selforganization, self-adaptation and evolution of the
system.
When a new product to be assembled on the
system arrives, a associated mechatronic agent is
instantiated, what starts the execution of the production process described as skills composition
(Barata et al., 2005). The mechatronic agent will
negotiate the steps of production process with the
resource agents. At the end of the implementation of its production process, the physical product will be assembled and the mechatronic agent
can be terminated.
3.2

Project Study of Reconfigurable Manufacturing Systems (SRMS)

In Brazil, there are few initiatives to use SOA
and MAS in manufacturing system. The Federal
University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), associated with the National Service of Industrial

961

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Learning (SENAI) are developing a project called
Study of Reconfigurable Manufacturing Systems
(SRMS). Despite of the name, it has the goal to
implement EAS in a real world scenario. The
proposed assembly system is formed by 2-7 module, which are responsible for the mounting of
different colours boxes in a given set of colours.
Fig. 3 shows the structure of the plant to be implemented. It will be used for SENAI students to
implement their research and testing its proposals
for self-organization. They are students at a technical level, who work in manufacturing companies,
where the concepts shown here can be used in real
production systems.
The plant SRMS will have autonomous assembly modules, each one with specific function. The
configuration of these modules and the form of
interaction between them will define the assembly system concept in use. By choosing to implement MAS, each module will be an agent, as
well as the pallet, where the boxes are mounted.
The agents interact each other to negotiate and
to execute functionalities of the assembly process.
This is the the coalition formation mechanisms.
For example, the pallet enters the system and it
needs to be mounted with blue and green parts,
then it searches for agents who can provide these
features and negotiates the skills need, allocates
agents able to execute that skills, and requests the
delivery of these services (assembly of blue and
green parts) of that allocated agents, in a correct
order of assembly.
This system behaviour is being tested in the
plant on situations such as the addition or removal of different boxes, and different modules.
A mechatronic agent platform will be used to
the development that system. It is based on the
Coalition Based Approach for Shop floor Agility
(CoBASA) (Barata, 2005). As such model is very
complex, with several different agents, we propose
a simplified model.
In this simplified model, there are three specific mechatronic agents CoalitionLeaderAgent, ResourceAgent and TransportAgent. The
boxes are modelled as CoalitionLeaderAgents,
the tools of the plant as ResourceAgents and the
conveyor as TransportAgents. In the specific case
of SRMS, there arent any TransportAgent, because the conveyor is constantly turned on and
do not requires command of activation. its circle
form makes with that all palets can get reach all
resource agents.
The Fig. 4 shows the basic interactions between agents in a SRMS system. The agent Monitor is not a ResourceAgent neither a CoalitionLeaderAgent, it is just a visualization tool
for the system and it permits to the user visualizes the evolution. It is shown in Fig. 5. The Ag1
and Ag2 agents are ResourceAgents and the Pc1
agent is a CoalitionLeaderAgent, that contains

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Figure 4 Sequence diagram of an execution of
SRMS prototype

Figure 5 A screenshot of a monitoring tool of a
SRMS system

the assembly process.
The CoalitionLeaderAgent uses FIPA
Contract Net protocol to make negotiation
(Bellifemine et al., 2004). It is a well established
protocol to enable negotiation between agents,
like this case. However, the execution of the
skill is done by mean of FIPA Request Protocol
due the fact that negotiation and execution
occurs in different moments for the product being
assembled.
As can be seen in the Fig 5, the modules of
the Ag1 and Ag2 agents are positioned on the top
of the conveyor. The product under production is
in line, one request after other. The negotiation
almost agents is made by the number of skills that
match with this process plan. So, in the example
showed, when Pc1 negotiates with Ag1 and Ag2,
it is sends its needs (red and blue colours), the
agents respond with the amount of Pc1 needs that
can feed on the time, and then the Pc1 chooses the
agent that presents the larger number. If a draw

962

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

occurs, it chooses the agent that first responded.
4

Conclusion

Recent paradigms have been developed to deal
with the problem of mass customization and its
challenges. This article gives a brief summary of
some of them, mainly BMS, HMS, and EASEPS,
some criteria for the choice of implementation
paradigm to fully support the self-organization
mechanisms in order to allow mass customization.
Although some efforts have been made in recent
years, an implementation of multi-agent system in
a real scenario manufacturing is still novelty.
The option of implementing EAS within the
industrial environment in Brazil has been effective in the use with learning tool. Due its more
complete definition of cooperation between agents
self-organization and self-adjustment mechanisms
the implementation of EPS application in a real
environment, lets significant learning, permitting
the visualization of features that brings the concept of MAS, through testing and analysis of the
behaviour and functionality of each agent.
But there is a large path to go to reach that
goal, namely the creation of fully functional
agents, autonomous, that interact with real machines, in a general way, and to address the transport system. These open points will be discussed
in the masters thesis of one of the authors.
Acknowledgments
This work has financial support for Amazon Research Support Foundation (FAPEAM) and Coordination for the Improvement of the Higher Level
Personnel (CAPES), which would to thanks.
References
Alsterman, H. and Onori, M. (2005). Definitions,
limitations and approaches of evolvable assembly system platforms, in L. CamarinhaMatos (ed.), Emerging Solutions for Future
Manufacturing Systems, Vol. 159 of IFIP International Federation for Information Processing, Springer Boston, pp. 367377.
Ashby, W. (1962). Principles of the Self-organizing
System, Principles of Self-organization
pp. 255278.
Babiceanu, R. and Chen, F. (2006). Development and applications of holonic manufacturing systems A survey, Journal of Intelligent
Manufacturing 17 111131. 10.1007s10845005-5516-y.
Barata, J. (2005). Coalition Based Approach for
Shop Floor Agility, PhD thesis, Universidade
Nova de Lisboa.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Barata, J., Camarinha-Matos, L. and Onori, M.
(2005). A Multiagent Based Control Approach for Evolvable Assembly Systems, Industrial Informatics, 2005. INDIN 05. 3rd
IEEE International Conference on, pp. 478 
483.
Barata, J., Santana, P. and Onori, M. (2006).
Evolvable assembly systems A development
roadmap, 12th IFAC Symposium on Information Control Problems in Manufacturing,
IFAC. St Etienne, France.
Bellifemine, F., Caire, G. and Greenwood, D.
(2004). Developing multi-agent systems with
jade, SussexJohn Wiley, p. 303.
Bussmann, S. and McFarlane, D. (1999). Rationales for holonic manufacturing control,
Proc. of Second Int. Workshop on Intelligent
Manufacturing Systems, Citeseer, pp. 177
184.
De Wolf, T. and Holvoet, T. (2005). Emergence Versus Self-Organisation Different
Concepts but Promising When Combined,
in S. Brueckner, G. Di Marzo Serugendo,
A. Karageorgos and R. Nagpal (eds), Engineering Self-Organising Systems, Vol. 3464
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Springer Berlin  Heidelberg, pp. 7791.
10.100711494676 1.
ElMaraghy, H. (2005). Flexible and reconfigurable
manufacturing systems paradigms, International Journal of Flexible Manufacturing Systems 17 261276. 10.1007s10696-006-90287.
Frei, R., Ferreira, B., Serugendo, G. and Barata,
J. (2009). An architecture for self-managing
evolvable assembly systems, 2009 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetic, IEEE, San Antonio, Texas,
USA. pre-release.
Gagliardi, M., Rajkumar, R. and Sha, L. (1996).
Designing for evolvability building blocks for
evolvable real-time systems, Real-Time and
Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium, IEEE 0 100.
Gou, L., Luh, P. and Kyoya, Y. (1998). Holonic
manufacturing scheduling architecture, cooperation mechanism, and implementation,
Computers in Industry 37(3) 213231.
Gu, W., Tang, D., Zheng, K. and Wang, L.
(2011). A neuroendocrine-inspired bionic
manufacturing system, Journal of Systems
Science and Systems Engineering 20 275
293. 10.1007s11518-011-5169-7.

963

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Koren, Y., Heisel, U., Jovane, F., Moriwaki, T.,
Pritschow, G., Ulsoy, G. and Brussel, H. V.
(1999). Reconfigurable manufacturing systems, CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology 48(2) 527  540.

Ueda, K. (2007).
Emergent synthesis approaches to biological manufacturing systems, in P. Cunha and P. Maropoulos (eds),
Digital Enterprise Technology, Springer US,
pp. 2534.

Mehrabi, M., Ulsoy, A. and Koren, Y. (2000).
Reconfigurable manufacturing systems and
their enabling technologies, International
Journal of Manufacturing Technology and
Management 1(1) 114131.

Van Brussel, H., Wyns, J., Valckenaers, P., Bongaerts, L. and Peeters, P. (1998). Reference architecture for holonic manufacturing systems Prosa, Computers in industry
37(3) 255274.

Onori, M. (2002). Evolvable assembly systems a new paradigm?, 33rd Int. Symposium on
Robotics (ISR), pp. 617621.

Westkaemper, E. (2006). New trends in production, in A. I. Dashchenko (ed.), Reconfigurable Manufacturing Systems and Transformable Factories, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1526.

Onori, M., Barata, J. and Frei, R. (2006). Evolvable Assembly Systems Basic Principles, Information Technology for Balanced Manufacturing Systems pp. 317328.
Randall, T., Terwiesch, C. and Ulrich, K. (2007).
User design of customized products, Marketing Science 26(2) 268280.
Ribeiro, L., Barata, J., Candido, G. and Onori,
M. (2010). Evolvable production systems
An integrated view on recent developments,
Proceedings of the 6th CIRP-Sponsored International Conference on Digital Enterprise
Technology, Springer, pp. 841854.
Ribeiro, L., Barata, J. and Colombo, A.
(2008). Mas and soa A case study exploring principles and technologies to support self-properties in assembly systems, SelfAdaptive and Self-Organizing Systems Workshops, 2008. SASOW 2008. Second IEEE International Conference on, pp. 192 197.
Serugendo, G. D. M., Fitzgerald, J., Romanovsky,
A. and Guelfi, N. (2008). A generic framework for the engineering of self-adaptive and
self-organising systems, in K. Bellman, M. G.
Hinchey, C. Muller-Schloer, H. Schmeck
and R. Wurtz (eds), Organic Computing Controlled Self-organization, number 08141
in Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings, Schloss
Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik,
Germany, Dagstuhl, Germany.
Tharumarajah, A., Wells, A. and Nemes, L.
(1998). Comparison of emerging manufacturing concepts, IEEE International Conference
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Vol. 1,
IEEE, pp. 325331.
Ueda, K. (1992). A concept for bionic manufacturing systems based on dna-type information, Proceedings of the IFIP TC5WG5.
3 Eight International PROLAMAT Conference on Human Aspects in Computer Integrated Manufacturing, North-Holland Publishing Co., pp. 853863.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

964