Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

DEVELOPMENT AND EVALUATION OF A TOPOLOGY OF MEASUREMENT
INSTRUMENT BASED ON NIR DIFFUSE REFLECTION
Fabio Augusto Gentilin, Bruna Tiemi Kobo, Lucas de Souza Ribeiro, Jose Alexandre
de Franca, Ana Lucia de S. M. Felcio, Maria Bernadete de M. Franca, Dari de O.
Toginho Filho


Universidade Estadual de Londrina
Laboratorio de Automacao e Instrumentacao Inteligente
Caixa Postal 10039, Londrina, PR, 86057-970, Brazil
Emails fabiogentilin@yahoo.com.br, bruna.kobo@gmail.com, lucassribeiro12@gmail.com,
jaf@jaf.eng.br, analusou@hotmail.com, mbmorais@uel.br, darit@uel.br
Abstract Generally, measurements of substances concentrations are realized by destructive and, sometimes,
slow methods. However, for quality control and time dependent experiments, it is desirable to perform nondestructive online measurements. One of the techniques able to achieve these requirements is near-infrared
spectroscopy. Unfortunately, the development of an instrument based on this technology is challenging due to
the influence of external factors and low signal-to-noise ratio. This paper presents a hardware platform that
can be easily adapted to determine concentration of many substances. Therefore, an condenser optical system
was developed using fixed mirrors to increase signal-to-noise ratio. Also, EMI filters, active filters and EMI
shielding were developed to reduce signal noise. In addition, InGaAs sensor, which present rapid response and
good sensibility to the near-infrared spectrum, were used. The developed system was evaluated by the detection
of moisture in instant coffee samples. The result shows that the equipment is sensitive to variations of humidity,
but it can also be applied to detect concentrations of other substances.
Keywords

InGaAs Sensors, NIR Spectrosmetry, Spectroscopy, Humidity Sensing, Temperature Control.

Resumo Geralmente, medidas de concentracao de substancias sao realizadas por metodos destrutivos e, as
vezes, demorados. Porem, para controle de qualidade e experimentos dependentes do tempo, deseja-se a realizacao
de medidas online nao destrutivas. Uma das tecnicas capazes de atingir esses requerimentos e a espectroscopia de
infravermelho proximo. Infelizmente, o desenvolvimento de instrumentos baseados nesta tecnologia e desafiadora
devido a influencia de fatores externos e baixa relacao de sinal-rudo. Este artigo apresenta uma plataforma
em hardware que pode ser facilmente adaptada para determinar concentracao de varias substancias. Para isso,
foi desenvolvido um condensador optico com espelhos fixos para aumentar a relacao sinal-ruido. Alem disso,
filtros EMI, filtros_ativos e blindagem EMI foram desenvolvidos para diminuir o ruido de sinal. Em adicao a
esses fatores, um sensor de InGaAs, que apresenta uma resposta rapida e boa sensibilidade para o espectro do
infravermelho proximo, foi utilizado. O sistema desenvolvido foi avaliado pela deteccao de umidade em amostras
de cafe soluvel. O resultado mostra que o equipamento e sensvel as variacoes de umidade, mas ele tambem pode
ser aplicado para detectar a concentracao de outra substancias.
Palavras-chave
.

1

Sensores de InGaAs, Espectrometria NIR, Espectroscopia, Deteccao de umidade, Controle

ture gives it the ability to operate in environments
where sampling speed (real-time measurement) is
an important factor.
Most of the researches in the NIR spectroscopy area are developed using commercial instruments (spectrometers). In these studies, the
analysis of the spectral response of each sample
is performed over a wide range of the electromagnetic spectrum in order to determine characteristics of interest (Riba Ruiz et al., 2012 Liang
et al., 2011). However, some researchers have developed new instruments, proposing cheaper alternatives, different acquisition methods or equipments for special conditions applications (Yang
et al., 2008 Malinen et al., 1998 Brennan et al.,
2003 Zhihai et al., 2011 Lauer et al., 2005 Larrain et al., 2008). Some of the developed equipments use light sources that are able to emit specific wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum
onto the sample. In these studies, the emitted
wavelength is set according to the types of molecular bonds in the sample, whose concentration is

Introduction

For decades, many techniques have been adopted
to determine specific concentrations in different
types of samples. Each approach has its limitations, ranging from problems associated with
adopted mechanical model, such as the work of
Kalamatianos et al. (2006), to changes in samples
characteristics due to chemical reactions occurring
during the analysis. One of these techniques takes
into account the bonds between molecules of the
substance of interest. This method is known as
NIR (Near-Infrared) spectroscopy, and relates the
amount of light applied to chemical bonds and the
energy absorbed by them. When these bonds have
dipole moment, they are capable of absorbing infrared vibrational energy at a characteristic wavelength. A major advantage of the infrared spectroscopy is the possibility of performing measurements using samples in their natural state. This
analysis method is nondestructive and allows samples to be in almost any physical state. This fea-

478

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014
970 nm

intended to be determined. (Kalamatianos et al.,
2006 Yang et al., 2008 Malinen et al., 1998 Lauer
et al., 2005 Huimin et al., 2007 Filic et al., 2005).
This was achieved by using LEDs and lasers as
monochromatic light sources. This kind of light
source is more efficient than polychromatic ones,
because each wavelength may be emitted separately. Furthermore, polychromatic light sources
usually have high emission of heat. One example is the tungsten halogen lamp, used in the researches of Brennan et al. (2003), Zhihai et al.
(2011) and Larrain et al. (2008).
In the works made by Brennan et al. (2003)
and Zhihai et al. (2011), optical systems were developed using grating technology, with no moving
parts, making it possible to analyze each wavelength. This kind of optical treatment is less sensible to mechanical noise. In another work, in order to determine ripeness in wine grapes, Larrain
et al. (2008) designed an optical device suitable for
analysis in the field, to be used with a portable
spectrometer and a light source. The developed
optical device was used to guide the light directly
to a wine grape berry and to collect the light that
has interacted with the fruit, what made it possible to analyze the ripeness without altering the
ripping process.
This paper presents a hardware and software
platform that can be easily adapted to be used
in determining concentrations of various types of
substances. As shown above, there are many researchers developing new instruments based on infrared spectroscopy. However, most of them superficially discuss the electronics and optics involved. Since the developed prototype is an essential part for obtaining the expected results,
superficial discussion about it tend to cause rework and delays the progress of related researches.
Such platform is sensitive to variations in molecular concentrations and is based on near-infrared
diffuse reflectance. Another important point, as
the developed equipment use only a few predetermined NIR wavelengths, based on LED technology, its not necessary the use of complex optical system, dependent of active alignment, as proposed by Kalamatianos et al. (2006). It was used
fixed mirrors, much more easier to align. Furthermore, the noise found by Huimin et al. (2007) was
reduced through the use of EMI (Electromagnetic
Interference) filters, electromagnetic shielding and
active filters, which caused the noise influence on
the output signal of the conditioning circuit to fall
to negligible levels. The equipment also has a temperature control circuit, which acts on the surface
of the photodetector to minimize the influence of
external thermal variation, since the dark resistance of that component changes with this variation.
The objective of this research was the development of an acquisition system capable of con-

LED driver
circuits

1,200 nm

Optical
system

Receptors signal
conditioning circuit

1,450 nm

Diffuse
reflectance
Sample

Temperature
sensor

Temperature
control system

Power supply

Figure 1 Block diagram of the prototype.
ditioning the signals of optical systems (data collection) and delivering the resulting signals to a
computer (data processing). The evaluation of
the developed system took into consideration the
sensitivity to moisture content variation of a set
of instant coffee samples prepared by spray drying process. The results showed that the system
is an option when signal conditioning for optical
systems is required.
2

Development of the Prototype

The NIR spectroscopy allows to indirectly estimate the concentration of substances based on
their spectral signature, e.g., covalent bonds of
H2 O, which shows peaks of greater intensity of
energy absorption in the near infrared (NIR) spectrum regions around 970 nm, 1,200 nm, 1,450 nm
and 1,940 nm. According to this concept, the
method used by this research involves the emission
of light beams of three different wavelengths onto
the sample under test and the subsequent analysis of the amount of light reflected by it. This is
done by means of a lighting system based on GaAs
LED operating in the NIR region, an InGaAs photodetector and an optical system. The developed
acquisition system architecture is shown in Figure
1.
The detection of moisture depends on an analog conditioning circuit operating with a control
circuit, which provides the measurements to a
computer and controls the temperature on the
photodetector used as sensitive element of the acquisition system. The activation of the NIR-LEDs
occurs sequentially, and a synchronous detection
technique is used. The light emitted by them
hits the surface of the sample under test and the
amount of light reflected reaches the photodetector, causing the variation of current at its junction. This current is conditioned by a conditioning circuit and subsequently the resulting signal is
delivered to a microcontroller.
In the following sections, the different parts
that compose the developed system are discussed

479

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Air flux

Heat
exchanger

Temperature sensor
Peltier element

Concave mirror

InGaAs PT511
Photodetector

Rc

d
Plane mirror

Lighting system
with GaAs LEDs

Optical
systems
cylinder

D
Reflected light
(diffuse reflectance)

Test sample in
the Petri dish

Ra

Figure 2 Sketch of the optical system. The light
reflected by the sample is directed to the window
of the photodetector.
in details.
2.1

Radiation emitter system

associates the distance D, the distance di (between the concave mirror and the image formation point) and the focal length of the mirror (f ).
Thus, for a given f and assuming an initial value
for D, the above equation allows to determine the
distance di between the concave mirror and the
point of its image formation. Moreover, since d
is also known and GaAs LEDs are located just
below the flat mirror (Figure 2), it is possible to
calculate the radius of the sample surface to be
illuminated by the LEDs, Ra , i.e.,
Ra  (D  d) sin ,

In this section, the main components of the optical
system used for this study are presented (Figure
2).
2.1.1

it will be obtained a small image which would be,
therefore, compatible with the window of the photodetector, but with lower relative intensity. On
the other hand, a very small D induces an image
of large relative intensity, but very sprawled out.
Thus, a point of balance between area and relative
light intensity must be calculated. This was done
as follows.
In the case of curvature of a concave mirror,
the equation
1
1
1
+
(1)

D di
f

(2)

where a viewing angle of the LEDs equal to  
15 was considered.
It is also necessary to know the magnification
factor, A, which relates the radius Ra of the sample surface illuminated by LEDs to the Ri of the
image formed by the concave mirror. As Ra is
proportional to D and Ri is proportional to di ,
then
di
A .
(3)
D

Optical system

The optical system is composed of a cylinder
which confines the light beams of the diffuse reflectance acquisition system and directs them to
the photodetector via a system of mirrors (plane
and concave) aligned according to Figure 2.
The concave mirror is located at the upper
part of the optical system in order to reflect the
ascendant light (which comes from the portion reflected by the sample), as shown in Figure 2. The
surface of the plane mirror is aligned with the
concave mirror to reflect the concentrated light
through this window directly on photodetector
(PT511), which is mounted in the upper center
of the concave mirror.
In the development of the optical system (Figure 2), it was arbitrarily defined Rc  5 cm as the
radius of the circle formed by the cross section
of the concave mirror (focus equal to f  7 cm).
Also, the radius of the flat mirror is 1.5 cm and
the distance between the mirrors (plane and concave) is equal to d  4.5 cm. Thus, it was only
necessary to calculate the distance D between the
concave mirror and the sample to be examined,
considering the application of as maximum relative light intensity Ir as possible on the photodetetors window. This should be done considering
two factors that act together the focusing and
the amount of light collected by the surface of the
concave mirror. That is because, if D is too large,

Furthermore, if A is known, it is possible to calculate the radius of the image formed by the concave
mirror, i.e.,
Ra
Ri 
.
(4)
A
At this point, it is important to note that the relative light intensity reaching the surface of the
concave mirror decreases with the inverse square
of the distance between the sample and the concave mirror, D. This is because, after reaching the
sample surface, the light is diffusely reflected, being spread in shape of an approximately spherical
surface. Therefore, it was defined as relative area
Ar the ratio of the area of the circle formed by the
cross-section of the concave mirror and the total
area of the spherical surface generated from the
illuminated region of the sample, which depends
on the distance D,
Ar 

Rc2
.
2D2

(5)

Finally, the relative intensity Ir is obtained from
the ratio between the relative area Ar , and the

480

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014
4

8

used are LED970-06, LED1200-03 and LED145003, manufactured by Roithner. They were selected according to the spectral signature of water,
which has higher absorption peaks of vibrational
energy in the regions of the spectrum emitted by
these photoemitters (Li, 2007).
The technique used to establish tuning between the activation of the LEDs and the conditioning system is known as synchronous detection.
In this case, the photoemitters are commuted at
a frequency at which the photodetector conditioning circuit is tuned. This was done using a bandpass filter. Thus, the influence of external light
sources that may introduce deviations in the output of the acquisition system is minimized. The
activation pulse of the LEDs is repeated every 1
ms.
During each cycle, a sequential activation of
the pair of LEDs (LED1 to LED3) is done. First,
the pair LED1 is turned on and remains in this
state for 500 s. This event occurs fifty times in
a row every 1 ms, i.e., at a frequency of 1 kHz, for
the same LED. At the end of LED1s sequence,
LED2 is driven with the same timing used for
LED1. After that, the same cycle occurs with
LED3. Then the complete light system activation
cycle is completed. Thus, only one pair of LEDs
is driven at a time, allowing the acquisition system to synchronize the output voltage measurement, which is proportional to the reflectance of
the sample, and the emission of each separated
wavelength of the electromagnetic spectrum (970
nm, 1,200 nm and 1,450 nm).

x 10

Relative Intensity (a. u.)

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0

10
20
30
40
50
Distance between the sample and the concave mirror (cm)

Figure 3 Relative intensity a balance between
the amount of light radiation and the distance D.
image area formed by the concave mirror on the
photodetetors window, i.e.
Ir 

Ar
.
Ri2

(6)

In the equation above, the term represented
by Ar is the factor that contributes to reducing the
amount of light collected by the concave mirror
and Ai  Ri2 is the term that contributes to the
variation due to focusing.
Equations (1) to (6) relate D with Ir . This
makes it possible, given a distance D, to determine the relative intensity (Ir ) analytically. Thus,
it was possible to present this relationship graphically in Figure 3. By analyzing this figure, it was
verified that Ir is maximum when D  11 cm.
Therefore, D  11 cm was adopted in the prototype.
It is important to note that D  11 cm is the
optimal value to obtain the maximum relative intensity of light on the sensor. However, the higher
Rc (Figure 2), the greater the absolute intensity
of light that reaches the sensor. As the results of
Section 3.1 show, Rc  5 cm was chosen for this
application and led to satisfactory results.
2.1.2

2.2

Conditioning Circuit

In this section, we present the electronic conditioning circuit. This circuits main objective is to
convert the light signal applied to the photodetector into an electrical signal, so it may be digitized by a microcontroller. The conditioning circuit is represented by the block diagram in Figure 4. This circuit was adjusted to work with an
output voltage value within a standard range of
0 to 5 V. The operational amplifier OP07E was
used in the circuits. It was chosen due to the
high common-mode rejection ratio (CMRR) of 106
dB, high input impedance (160 G) and low offset
voltage level (75 V). In the following paragraphs,
the conditioning circuit is described in details.
The input gain stage is divided into two parts
a current-to-voltage converter and a gain circuit.
The photodiode produce current when receives
light. So, the current must be converted to voltage. The photodetector PT511 was chosen because its spectral operational range complies with
the three wavelengths (970, 1,200 and 1,450 nm)
emitted by the LEDs. Then, the resultant voltage output of the current-to-voltage converter is
amplified by a inverter amplifier.

Lighting system

The system has three driver circuits used to drive
three pair of LEDs. Each circuit has two inputs,
a synchronization signal CLK, which imposes the
frequency of actuation (1 kHz), and the SX, which
enable the designated LEDs. When both signals
(SX and CLK) have a high logic level (5 V), a
current adjusted in the driver circuit flow through
the selected pair of LEDs.
The board with the LEDs is mounted just below the flat mirror (Figure 2). Thus, the beams
emitted by the LEDs (viewing angle   15 )
reach the surface of the sample with the maximum intensity and, at the same time, does not
adversely affect the reflected light. The LEDs

481

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014
Input gain
stage

Vc

Band-pass filter

Light (NIR)
reflected
by the
sample

OP07E

D3

OP07E

1N4148

CI5
D4

R11
270

C3
100 nF

Vd
CI6

1N4148
R12

Peak-detector

Output gain
and offset

CT1
Q3

3,3 k

Conditioned
output
signal

R10

1M

Figure 5 Peak detector circuit and conditioning
circuit output.

Figure 4 Conditioning circuit block diagram.
The signal from the input gain stage is applied
to a bandpass filter with a center frequency of
f0  1 kHz  1. This accuracy was achieved by
implementing the filter using the integrated circuit
UAF42AP, manufactured by Texas Instruments,
which has capacitors and resistors with precision
of 0.5 . The type of filter used was a secondorder Butterworth.
The gain and offset stage is responsible for receiving the output signal from the bandpass filter
(BP OUT) and adapting it to the next stage. So,
the circuit includes a precision voltage reference of
5.000 V (0,04) called V STAB, provided by the
integrated circuit LT1461CCS8-5. This stage also
includes a summing amplifier circuit. The voltage
output Vc of this circuit is given by


BP OU T
V ST AB
Vc  R14
+
,
(7)
P OT 4
P OT 3

peak detector reaches its maximum level. Then,
during two cycles of Vc , the voltage measurement
of this stages output is performed. Finally, CT1
is triggered to discharge the capacitor of the peak
detector, which is required to perform a new measurement.
2.3

Control System

The Control System (CS) is an independent module of the acquisition system. This is based on
the 8-bit microcontroller MC9S08JM32, of HCS08
family, manufactured by Freescale, which presents
an AD converter of 10 bits resolution. It is used
to digitize the conditioning system output signal.
The CS performs the functions of triggering the
LEDs in a pre-defined sequence, controlling the
CT1 signal, controlling the temperature of the
photodetector, processing the measurement data
and communicating with a computer (via USB
communication port).
The InGaAs photodetectors are known to be
quite sensitive to temperature variations. Therefore, the temperature of the sensor and all the
conditioning circuit of Figure 4 is constantly maintained at 25  C, by means of a digital controller
with proportional and integral actions. This controller is also based on the MC9S08JM32 microcontroller, and uses a thermoelectric cell with
Peltier effect as the actuator and an integrated circuit LM92, which has a resolution of only 0.0625

C, as the temperature sensor. The Peltier chip is
powered by an H bridge excited by PWM modulation, whose duty cycle depends on the action of
the digital controller.

where P OT 4 and P OT 3 are resistances.
The next circuit is a peak detector (Figure 5).
The information related to the H2 O concentration
in the sample is the amplitude of the band pass
filters output signal. Therefore, the purpose of
this detector circuit is to retain information concerning the maximum of that signal.
In the proposed system, for a sample with low
moisture content, little light is absorbed by covalent bonds of H2 O. Then, more light emitted by
the illumination system is reflected to the optical
system. This causes an increase in the signal amplitude of the peak detector stage. On the other
hand, a sample with high concentration of moisture tends to absorb more light, resulting in a low
signal amplitude at the output of this stage.
The signal generated by this stage, Vd , corresponds to the output of the conditioning circuit.
It is controlled by the control system (discussed
in Section 2.3) via signal CT1 (Figure 5), synchronized with the LEDs activation. The signal
generated by this stage is digitized by a microcontroller and depends on the synchronism with
the command CT1 (Figure 5). When a LED is
pulsed, the capacitor of the peak detector circuit
starts charging. After three cycles of the signal
Vc , it is considered that the output signal of the

3

Experimental Results

Aiming to test the proposed technique, a prototype was built. The acquisition system developed
has two overlapping enclosures the upper one,
made of metal which houses the electronics modules and the lower one, made of wood, where the
sample accesses the optical system, as shown in
Figure 6. The sample placed in a Petri dish is put
at the bottom of the optical system and receives

482

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Heat
exchanger

Metal enclosure
Optical
System

H bridge
Peltier
chip

Sample compartment

Power
supply

Door

Computer

Photodetector
board

Figure 6 he sample placed in the Petri dish is
introduced at the bottom of the optical system.
The computer is used as a data acquisition system.

Analog signal
conditioning board

the light emitted by the NIR LEDs.
In Figure 7, it is possible to verify the distribution of the electronic circuitry housed in the metal
enclosure, corresponding to the blocks shown in
Figure 1. The LED driver circuits and conditioning circuit is present in the analog signal conditioning board. The conditioning circuit contains
the blocks shown in Figure 4 input gain stage,
band-pass filter, output gain and offset and peakdetector. The light and temperature sensors are
placed in the photodetector board. The optical system, the NIR LEDs and the sample compartment are assembled below the photodetector
board. Furthermore, the temperature control system is composed by the H bridge, heat exchanger
and the peltier chip. The control system board
contains the CPU and the AD converter.
The H bridge (used to drive the Peltier
chip) was assembled in a metallic box to reduce
the spread of electromagnetic interference (EMI).
Also, we used two power supplies. One of them
is dedicated to instrumentation circuits, and the
other one is used to drive the Peltier chip.
The signal output provided by the bandpass filter is shown in Figure 8 (referred to as
BP OUT). Also, as discussed above, the signal
BP OUT is conditioned as indicated in Equation
(7), and then its peak value is detected by the circuit of Figure 5, whose output signal is shown in
Figure 8 and referred to as Peak Output. One
can see even the discharge of the capacitor C3
caused by signal CT1 (Figure 5). In addition,
in the same figure, it is possible to observe the
moment when the signal Peak Output is digitized by the SC, after three periods of the signal
BP OUT. After two more cycles, a new pulse
occurs at CT1, what discharges the capacitor C3
and drop Peak Output to zero volts.
3.1

Control system
board (microcontroller)

Figure 7 Top view of the enclosure of the developed prototype. One can observe the grouping
of the electronic modules and the support of the
optical system.

5
4

ADC
conversion

Output (V)

3

BPOUT
Peak Output

2
1
0
1

10

15

20
Time (ms)

25

Figure 8 Output signals from the conditioning
circuit. The measurement depends on the command CT1.

of the samples were obtained by the Karl Fischer
method, and are presented in Table 1. Also, in the
selection of these samples, we used the triplicate
method, i.e., three of each sample with the same
amount of moisture have been (non-sequentially)
inserted in the prototype. This method was applied to a group of 19 samples, totaling 57 analysis. Finally, it is important to notice that, in
each of the 57 trials, the samples had a standard
volume of 40.2  103 m3 and, before being inserted in the prototype, they were homogenized
in the Petri dish in order to make the surface of
the sample uniform.

Set of samples used in the tests

In the experimental tests of the prototype, we used
19 samples of instant coffee with moisture concentrations between 1.55 and 2.53. The moisture

483

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

measurements taken in the presence of external
light and those ones taken under normal conditions, the average differences between them were
0.22 at 970 nm, 0.31 at 1,200 nm e de 0.28
at 1,450 nm.

Table 1 Samples used in tests with the prototype.
Sample
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Moisture()1.551.671.781.821.861.901.911.931.981.98
Sample
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Moisture()2.002.002.012.042.122.172.262.402.53 -

3.4

25.5

With the prototypes temperature control active
and considering the system immune to external
light sources, the 57 tests described in Section 3.1
were repeated. The results are shown in Figure
10. Looking at this figure, its possible to observe
that there is a significant variation in the prototype output depending on the amount of moisture
present in the coffee samples. In addition, the
graph of the curves corresponding to the spectral
bands of 970 nm and 1,200 nm shows a step in
2.0 of moisture. This occurs due to the fact that
these bands are not characteristic of the water,
but complement bands, which are needed to make
it possible the multivariate calibration (Li, 2007).
Thus, it is natural that these curves have a nonlinear tendency since these wavelengths are also
absorbed by other molecular bonds (other than
OH) in the chemical composition of the coffee
samples (Johnson and Wichern, 2007). Instead,
the band centered at 1,450 nm is characteristic of
water and is not absorbed by any other type of
chemical bond. Therefore, this presents a much
more linear behavior as a function of the coffee
samples moisture.
The multivariate calibration of the prototype
is not covered in this article. However, it is well
known that, to make it possible to perform such
a calibration, those curves corresponding to each
of the wavelengths used in the system should fit
to a linear model with a coefficient of determination (R2 ) greater than 0.80 (Ewing, 1975). For the
specific case of this prototype, the calculated R2
was 0.83, 0.93 and 0.98 for the wavelength bands
970, 1,200 e 1,450 nm, respectively. These results
indicate that the proposed system is very promising.

Temperature (Celsius)

25
24.5
24
23.5
23
22.5
0

2

4

6

8
10
Time (minutes)

12

14

16

Figure 9 Temperature inside the prototype in relation to time.
3.2

Evaluation of the prototype regarding the influence of temperature

Experimentally, it was verified that, without the
temperature control, for a 5  C variation in room
temperature, there was a variation in the response
of the photodetector of 3.63, 3.62 and 3.61
for the bands centered at 970 nm, 1,200 nm and
1,450 nm, respectively. This result shows the
adopted sensors dependence of the temperature.
On the other hand, by using the digital controller
with proportional and integral gains equal to, respectively, Kp  2 and Ki  132 (empirically
determined), the temperature of the photodetector in steady state remains practically constant,
as discussed below.
Figure 9 shows the variation of the temperature of the conditioning circuit over time right
after switching on the equipment. One can observe that the temperature becomes stable at 25

C, after five minutes, when the steady state RMS
error is equal to ERMS  0.0391  C, while the
maximum error was 0.1  C.
3.3

Response concerning the moisture detection

4

Conclusions

This paper discussed the process of construction,
adjustment and testing of an optoelectronic system prototype, which can be used for quantifying substances in solid materials. This equipment
is based on NIR spectroscopy, wherein molecules
of the substance to be measured absorb part of
the incident radiation. Thus, by observing the reflected radiation, it is possible to quantify the substance of interest in the material under analysis.
The proposed technique uses a set of fixed mirrors,
light emitters of GaAs and an InGaAs photodetector. Electromagnetic interferences were minimized using EMI filters, metal shielding and active

Evaluation of the prototype concerning the
influence of external light sources

In order to assess the influence of the external
light on the prototype response, 57 trials were performed as described in Section 3.1, this time with
a 60 W incandescent light bulb switched on inside
the cabinet where the samples are placed. Despite
this interference, it was observed that the presence
of a continuous spectrum of the light emitted by
the incandescent lamp did not significantly influence the system output. In fact, considering the

484

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Johnson, R. A. and Wichern, D. W. (2007). Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Prentice Hall.

6
970 nm
1200 nm
1450 nm

5

Kalamatianos, D., Wellstead, P., Liatsis, P. and
Houston, R. (2006). Control and data analysis tool for a novel FT-NIR spectrometer, UKACC Control 2006 Mini Symposia
pp. 235245.

Output (V)

4
3
2

Larrain, M., Guesalaga, A. and Agosin, E. (2008).
A multipurpose portable instrument for determining ripeness in wine grapes using NIR
spectroscopy, Instrumentation and Measurement, IEEE Transactions on 57(2) 294302.

1
0
1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2
2.1
Moisture ()

2.2

2.3

2.4

Lauer, C., Szalay, S., Bohm, G., Lin, C., Kohler,
F. and Amann, M.-C. (2005). Laser hygrometer using a vertical-cavity surface-emitting
laser (VCSEL) with an emission wavelength
of 1.84 m, Instrumentation and Measurement, IEEE Transactions on 54(3) 1214
1218.

Figure 10 Response of the prototype as a function
of moisture present in the coffee powder, in a 62
air relative humidity and 25  C.
filters. Besides, the prototype has a temperature
control system which acts on the surface of the
photodetector in order to minimize the influence
of the environment temperature variation. The
experimental results show that the technique is
promising. Finally, it is important to emphasize
that, although the system has been assessed by
quantifying the moisture in samples of coffee powder, it can be easily modified to quantify other
types of substances. For that, it is necessary just
to change the wavelength of the LED emitters.

Li, H. (2007). Near-Infrared diode laser absorption spectroscopy with applications to reactive
systems and combustion control, PhD thesis, Stanford University, Stanford, California,
U.S.A.
Liang, X. Y., Li, X. Y., Lei, T. W., Wang, W. and
Gao, Y. (2011). Study of sample temperature compensation in the measurement of soil
moisture content, Measurement 44(10) 2200
 2204.

Agradecimentos

Malinen, J., Kansakoski, M., Rikola, R. and Eddison, C. G. (1998). LED-based NIR spectrometer module for hand-held and process
analyser applications, Sensors and Actuators
B Chemical 51(1-3) 220  226.

The authors would like to thank CAPES, CNPq
and Fundacao Araucaria for the financial support
for the research.
References

Riba Ruiz, J.-R., Canals, T. and Cantero Gomez,
R. (2012). Comparative study of multivariate methods to identify paper finishes using infrared spectroscopy, Instrumentation
and Measurement, IEEE Transactions on
61(4) 10291036.

Brennan, D., Alderman, J., Sattler, L., OConnor,
B. and OMathuna, C. (2003). Issues in development of NIR micro spectrometer system
for on-line process monitoring of milk product, Measurement 33(1) 67  74.

Yang, H., Wei, X., Liang, X., Su, M. and
Lu, X. (2008). A SoC and led based reconfigurable subminiature spectrometer for
hand-held measurement applications, Measurement 41(1) 44  54.

Ewing, G. W. (1975). Instrumental methods of
Chemical analysis, McGraw-Hill.
Filic, M., Corluka, V. and Valter, Z. (2005). Optimal signal conditioning in the NIR moisture
meter, Applied Electromagnetics and Communications, 2005. ICECom 2005. 18th International Conference on.

Zhihai, Z., Xiangxia, M., Yuanjun, G. and Wei,
W. (2011). A novel MOEMS NIR spectrometer, Physics Procedia 19(0) 110  114.

Huimin, H., Mi, P. and Junhua, L. (2007).
Extending AOTF-NIR spectrometer to gas
measurement, Electronic Measurement and
Instruments, 2007. ICEMI 07. 8th International Conference on.

485