Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

MODELLING OF POWER PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS FOR INVESTIGATION OF
ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCES PHENOMENA
Philipe Pereira, Helder de Paula, Braz J. C. Filho, Jose A. S. Brito, Anderson V.
Rocha


Electrical Engineering Department - Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil



COELBA - Salvador - BA, Brazil

Electrical Engineering Department - CEFET - MG, Brazil

Emails philipe.mineiro@gmail.com, helder@cpdee.ufmg.br, braz.cardoso@ieee.org,
jbrito@coelba.com.br, andersonrocha@des.cefetmg.br
Abstract Photovoltaic power systems have been widely spread in the last years, especially for their versatility, the price reductions provided by production scale, the advances in the solar panels conversion efficiency and
the incentives for use of renewable sources of energy. However, the power conversion stage necessary to inject
the generated power into the grid involves the use of electronic devices whose switching process may generate
distorted voltage and current waveforms that interact with other system components, frequently producing unexpected and undesirable effects, related with electromagnetic interferences and power quality issues. This paper
proposes to investigate the different particularities of the system which propitiate the occurrence of these phenomena and how to mitigate their effects, focusing 15 kW-150 kW grid-connected PV systems usually installed
in commercial buildings and schools, greater than typical residential installations and less than multi MW solar
farms.
Keywords

Common-mode currents, electromagnetic compatibility, photovoltaic generation.

Resumo Sistemas de geracao fotovoltaicos tem se difundido nos ultimos anos, especialmente devido a sua
versatilidade, as reducoes de custos por Watt produzido advindo do barateamento promovido pela producao em
escala, aos avancos na eficiencia da conversao e aos incentivos para o uso de fontes_renovaveis. Entretanto, o estagio de conversao de energia necessario para injetar a energia gerada envolve o uso de dispositivos eletronicos cujo
processo de chaveamento pode gerar forma de tensao e correntes distorcidas que interagem com outros componentes do sistema, eventualmente produzindo efeitos indesejaveis, relacionados com interferencia eletromagnetica
e qualidade_de_energia. Esse trabalho propoe investigar as diferentes particularidades do sistema que propiciam a
ocorrencia desses fenomenos e como migitar suas efeitos, focando sistemas de media potencia conectados a rede,
geralmente instalados em predios comercionais e escolas.
Palavras-chave

.

Introduction

brings many advantages to the system, as a reduction in size, weight and cost of the filters required
to suit the generate voltage and current waveform. However, the high frequency voltages and
currents arouse conducted and radiated electromagnetic interferences that are usually neglected
in low frequencies(Skibinski et al., 1999), so that
it is necessary to adapt the models in order to take
into account these phenomena.
The most common power converter topologies generate a common-mode voltage that induces ground currents circulating through the
circuit, which is closed by stray capacitances
of the system, mainly those of the solar modules. These currents contribute to electromagnetic
interferences(Skibinski et al., 1999), increase the
voltage stress on the lines and switches, potentially leading to reduction in lifetime(Essakiappan
et al., 2011). Depending on the intensity of
this leakage current, the occurrence of a residualcurrent device (RCD) misacting is possible, turning off the system. This will causes losses of
production, loss of confidence in the PV technology and a safety problem, since system owners
may be tempted to suppress the RCD or increase
the disconnection threshold, generating a poten-

Among different ways to produce electricity from
solar radiation, the photovoltaic conversion has
many advantages, like its modularity, which permits the installation of small units with few kW
until large solar plants with many MW, its practicality regarding the direct process of energy conversion, which eliminates the need of rotatory machines or other moving part machines, what makes
cheaper and simpler its maintenance, and its integrability to the surrounding ambience, not requiring large modifications in the structure of the
building where it is installed.
However, the power conditioning system necessary to adjust the power produced by the photovoltaic source, involves a switching process of the
DC current at the PV array output, in order to
adjust the voltage level, to extract the maximum
power from the panels (these two functions are
normally performed by a DC-DC boost converter)
and to synthesize an AC voltage compatible with
the grid (what is carried out by DC-AC inverter).
The recent advances in solid-state switching
devices technology have enabled the operation of
the power converter at high frequencies, what

996

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

tially dangerous situation(Tran-Quoc et al., 2010).
Some manufacturers provide special RCD, called
residual-current monitoring unit (RCMU), which
is capable to distinguish this intrinsic leakage current from an abnormal fault current.
The injection of voltage and current harmonics into the electric grid causes many undesirable
effects to the devices connected nearby, as overheating in transformer and cables, mechanical oscillations in AC rotatory machines, resonances in
capacitor banks and disturbances in some electronic devices. So it is very important for the system to meet the regional standards for harmonic
control in order to avoid unexpected damages in
surrounding installations, particularly when it is
dealing with medium and high-power units.
Most part of the literature about this subject is focused on low-power PV systems, which
are rated from 6 up to 15kW , have just one
single-phase inverter and are installed in residential dwelling, also known as rooftop systems
(Kerekes et al., 2008 Vazquez et al., 2010). Large
solar farms, with rated power from 150kW up to
several M W , require a special attention since the
problems described above are intensified when the
system rated power is higher, as it is reported in
(Araneo et al., 2009 Essakiappan et al., 2011).
This paper aims the medium-power PV systems, rated from 15kW up to 150kW , installed
over small buildings, like commercial centers, industrial roof-tops or schools, connected to low or
medium-voltage grid, and its purpose is to investigate what concerns are neglected in small systems and must be taken into account and to what
extent the high-power systems issues also are important to medium-power systems. Simulations
results are presented.
2
2.1

(a)

Figure 1
topologies

(b)

Common photovoltaic generation

point tracking (MPPT) or each PV module may
have its own converter, which increases the overall system efficiency, since the power extraction of
each module is maximized(Wilhelm, 2013).
The first grid-connected PV systems included
a low frequency (LF) transformer inside the inverter, in order to confer galvanic isolation between the DC and AC sides of the unity, even
for small residential systems, what was required
by nearly all national regulations(Guba et al.,
2007).
Developments in inverter designs allowed eliminating the transformer without any
disadvantage regarding personal safety or grid
integration(Calais and Agelidis, 1998). The transformerless topology brings many advantages to
the system, as a reduction in the power converter
size, weight and cost and an increase of the overall efficiency, so that many regulatory agencies are
reviewing their codes in order to allow distributed
generation units with transformerless inverter.
The recommended practice IEEE 929
(Recommended Practice for Utility Interface
of Photovoltaic Systems, 2000) enumerates
the advantages in installing a LF distribution
transformer serving the PV facility, but it also
indicates that these advantages may be achieved
by other meanings, especially with a careful
inverter design.

Power conditioning issues

Most common topologies of power converters

Medium-power and high-power PV systems can
be generically grouped in two main categories regarding their power conditioning unity topologies
(Essakiappan et al., 2011 Guillot, 2012)

2.2

Stray elements in high frequency modelling

An undesirable consequence of handling a waveform with substantial high frequency content is
the excitation of the stray elements of the system even short lengths of cables may have a
no negligible inductance and two conductors insulated from each other may have a no negligible capacitance. When the circuit is excited with
a waveform containing sharp current and voltage
variations, these stray elements will be activated
and they will eventually distort the original waveforms.
Trapezoidal pulses with a raise time tr have a
considerable harmonic content until the frequency
given for Equation 1.

1. One or more three-phase inverter
2. One or more groups of three single-phase inverter.
Since the flow power in a three-phase balanced system is constant, a three-phase inverter
requires a smaller DC link capacitor in comparison to single-phase inverter(Kerekes et al., 2008).
When there are more than one inverter, they may
be associated in series-parallel combinations, in
order to reach the grid voltage. Figure 1 illustrates these topologies.
The inverter may have one or more DC-DC
booster converters that perform maximum power

fb 

997

1
tr

(1)

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

For tr  1s, the value fb  318kHz is obtained. The base capacitance and inductance are
given for the following equations

3
3.1

Zb
1
Sb
, Lb 


2
2fb Zb
2fb Vb
2fb
2fb Sb
(2)
For Sb  100kV A, Vb  1kV , the values
Cb  50nF and Lb  5.0H are calculated. Neglecting the elements whose values are smaller
than 1 of this value, the threshold capacitance
and inductance are determined
Cb  500pF, Lb  5.0H
2.3

Solar modules and strings

The photovoltaic power source is an association
of many solar modules each one of them comprises a string of PV cells deposited on a film
and encapsulated by a transparent material, usually a special glass, and involved by a metallic
frame that confers mechanical protection. There
are modules with some variations from this general structure, so the literature provided by manufacturers usually classifies the modules as follows
(Guillot, 2012 SMA, 2012)

Vb2

Cb 

System modelling

(3)

 Frameless glass-glass modules
 Glass-glass modules with an aluminium
frame

Common-mode voltage generated by a threephase inverter

 Thin-film PV modules.

Another property of PWM is the eventual presence of a common-mode voltage generated by the
three-phase bridge. In fact, the sum of the line-toneutral voltage of the inverter outputs is different
from zero.
When there is no transformer between the DC
side of the plant and the grid, the neutral is not
connected to the inverter and the modules are isolated (i.e., their frames are not grounded and they
are far from the ground plane), in a situation illustrated in Figure 2(a), it is observed a change in
the voltage level of the DC side for each switching
stage. The simulation result shown in Figure 2(b)
illustrates this behavior.

The structure of these modules is illustrated
in Figure 3.

(a) Frameless glass-glass

(b) Glass-glass with an aluminium frame

(c) Thin-film

Figure 3 Cross-section of different modules.
For security purposes, all exposed conductive
parts, as the mounting racks and modules frames,
shall be bonded to the ground. Therefore, the
ground plane is shifted near the PV cells, so that
the module terminals to ground capacitance are
no negligible, as it is illustrated in Figure 4.

(a) For a floating reference PV array, the voltage
at its terminals varies for each switching stage.

Figure 4 Stray capacitance of the solar panels.
To ascertain that the value of these capacitances is very important not only for the evaluation of the ground current values but also for other
studies like fault location in PV module string,
a method called earth capacitance measurement
(ECM)(Takashima et al., 2008) is used. In literature, there are basically two methods to determine
the module stray capacitances

(b) Simulation results - unit kV  fsw  12kHz
VDC  708V .

Figure 2 Common-mode voltage pattern.
In section 4.1, it will be discussed the consequences of these voltages variations and the methods to avoid it.

998

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

1. by measuring the capacitance between the
modules terminals and from these to the
grounded frame. The measurements are performed under dark conditions since if the
modules are illuminated they would be working and applying a voltage to the earth capacitances whereas the diffusion capacitances
would be ignored (Takashima et al., 2008)

(a) Distributed capacitances

2. by an estimated calculation of the module capacitance as a function of its geometry module and the material(SMA, 2012).
The complete modelling of a solar panel is
shown in Figure 5, but a medium-power solar
plant often has many solar panels ( 103 ), so it
is practical to use an equivalent circuit in simulations.

(b) Lumped capacitances

Figure 7 PWM waveform and its spectra - unit
A fsw  12kHz Cleak  25nFmodule.
trated in just one element (usually connected to
the negative pole).
Figure 5 Solar panel modelling.

3.2

In medium and high power photovoltaic systems,
the location of the arrays and strings may eventually be distant of several tens of meters from the
place where the inverters are sheltered and a long
DC cable connection is necessary.
The inverters, in their turn, may be distant
from the LF transformer that makes the connection to the point common of coupling and a long
AC cable connection is necessary.
For power switches operating with very short
rise and fall times, it is possible the occurrence of
pulses reflections between and consequently transient overvoltages at the cable terminals, requiring thus a method to take into consideration these
phenomena.
In the present work, the cable modelling followed the methodology proposed in (De Paula
et al., 2008), used for studying of high-frequency
phenomena in PWM drive applications, when the
connection is established through a long cable.
The models are shown in Figure 8 and their parameters were calculated using the CABLE CONSTANTS routine of ATP-EMTP.

Figure 6(a) shows the equivalent circuit obtained from the association of the modules capacitances. In (Essakiappan et al., 2011) is presented
a method to calculate the value of the equivalent
capacitance of these associations. Many authors
(Kerekes et al., 2008 Schmidt and Burger, 2013),
however, prefer the lumped model, consisting in
one or two capacitances inserted in each string
terminal, as it is illustrated in Figure 6(b). Typical values found in literature indicate about 50 
150nFkW .

(a) Equivalent circuit of a
PV string.

DC cables and AC cables

(b) Lumped circuit.

Figure 6 Stray capacitances in a PV string.
The simulation results shown in Figure 7 were
obtained for the same parameters, but with different PV array circuits and they indicate that there
is no difference in the overall leakage current of the
PV array, if the system is modeled with lumped
or distributed capacitances.
In (Tran-Quoc et al., 2010), it is shown that
the distribution of these capacitances between the
positive or negative terminal does not change the
value of the leakage capacitances, so that all the
stray capacitance of the module may be concen-

(a) DC cables

(b) AC cables

Figure 8 Cable modelling.

999

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

3.3

Inverter, its switches, modulation technique
and filter

There are many different topologies of a threephase inverter for a grid connected photovoltic
system. Discussions about the differences and advantages of common topologies may be found in
(Kerekes et al., 2009 Rogalla, 2013) and special
topologies and modulation techniques aiming to
reduce the common mode voltage are presented
in (Vazquez et al., 2010 Cavalcanti et al., 2010).
In the present paper, a three-phase inverter
with common negative booster will be used in the
simulations. It is a simple converter with few components, which makes it cheaper and with a high
efficiency. Its circuit is shown in Figure 9.

(a) conventional

Figure 10 Per-phase circuit for transformers.
Table 1 Parameters of the simulation
Component Quantity
Value
photovoltaic

Vpv

455.04V

power source

rs

1.067

Cl

600nF

fsw

12kHf

CDC

10F

Csw

500pF

tr

1s

Ll

5

inverter

Figure 9 Three-phase inverter with common negative booster.

transformer

The switch rise time was adjusted through the
insertion of a snubber RC circuit in parallel to
these devices. A leakage capacitance Csw was also
inserted from the middle-points of the bridges to
the ground to represent the stray capacitances of
the switches to the heat sink. The inverter operates with a three-phase SPWM modulation technique. An L filter was inserted at the inverter
output to eliminate the high-frequency harmonics.
3.4

grid

4.1

S

40kV A

Vpri,sec

400400V, , Y

Rg , Lg

21m, 1H

Use of a transformer

The common-mode voltage is produced by the inverter during the switching process. However, in
that simulation, the modules were isolated (i.e.,
it was considered a very small value for the stray
capacitance to ground of the panels), hence there
was no leakage current through the circuit.
Changing the value of the stray capacitances
of the panels to a higher value (600nF , as indicated in Table 1), the simulation gives the results
shown in Figure 11.
For each switching stage, the voltage at the
modules terminals changes, inducing a current to
charge the stray capacitances. As a result, a very
high leakage current is observed. According to
(Rogalla, 2013), this situation of floating voltage
of the PV power source shall be avoided, and a
voltage reference must be given to the DC side of
the facility.
The insertion of the LF transformer and the
connection of the neutral of the grid to the split
capacitor of the DC link may reduce these voltage
fluctuations, as it is shown in Figures 12 and 13.
The split capacitor leakage currents were already
shown in Figure 7.
With the insertion of the transformer, the
only remaining returning paths for the ground cur-

Transformer

The capacitances between the primary and the
secondary windings and from these to the ground
must be inserted since there may be a considerable current flow through them. Figure 10(a) illustrates the equivalent circuit.
The use of a shielded transformer is prescribed
in(Essakiappan et al., 2011) as a way to seize
the ground current that would flow through the
stray capacitances between the transformer windings and would reach the grid, and its circuit is
shown in Figure 10(b).

4

(b) shielded

Simulation results and discussion

Simulations were performed in PSCAD by assembling the models described above, with the parameters indicated in Table 1 and a time step of
0.1s.

1000

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

(a) Vp and Vm

(a) Vp and Vm

(b) Ileak

(b) Ileak

Figure 11 Floating PV power source - units kV ,
A

(c) Ileak

Figure 12 Split capacitor, transformerless. Vp
and Vm - units kV
rent are the stray capacitances of the switches and
of the primary windings. The contributions of
these to paths are illustrated in Figure 13(d).
4.2

(d) Ileak,transf ormer (blue) and Ileak,switches
(red)

Figure 13 Connection to grid through conventional LF transformer - units kV , A

Functional grounding

Connecting one of the conductors of the DC side
to ground may also reduce the voltage fluctuations responsible for the leakage current circulation. USA standards stipulates that one conductor of a 2-wire system or the center tap conductor
of a bipolar system shall be grounded, except if the
system complies with a list of exigencies(National
Electrical Code (NEC), 2014). According to
(Electrical installations of buildings - Part 7-712
Requirements for special installations or locations
- Solar photovoltaic power supply systems, 2002),
bond to ground of one of the live conductors of the
DC side is permitted, if there is at least a simple
separation between the AC side and the DC side.
Figure 14 shows the simulation results. A small
reduction in voltage fluctuations was observed.
4.3

are shown in Figure 15. The charging current flow
through the DC cables increased the leakage current and the voltage fluctuations.
An interesting result is observed in Figures 15(c) and 15(d), which shows the line-to-line
voltage measured at the inverter output (blue)
and at the point of common coupling to grid, in
other words, between the ends of the AC cable.
The oscillatory behavior is originated from the
successive reflections of the PWM pulses against
the grid impedance.
With the insertion of a transformer at the
point of common coupling, the simulations results
shown in Figure 15 are obtained. The leakage
inductance of the transformer represents a large
impedance for the propagated PWM pulses, which
increases the effects of the reflected pulses. As a
result, the line-to-line voltage presents a polluted
waveform.

Relation between the length of cables for DC
and AC transmission

The simulations results obtained from the insertion of the long DC and AC cables in the circuit

1001

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

(a) Vp and Vm

(a) Vp and Vm

(b) Ileak

(b) Ileak

(c) Vf,inverter (blue) and Vf,P CC (green)
(c) Ileak

Figure 14 Center tap conductor solidly grounded
- units kV , A

5

Conclusion
(d) Vf,inverter (blue) and Vf,P CC (green)

The main goal of this work was to present the high
frequency phenomena found in medium-power PV
systems. The common-mode circuit of the facility was studied, indicating the return-path of the
current induced by the inverter switching process.
The electromagnetic interference issues were discussed and a complete modelling of each one of the
system components was present in order to validate the results obtained from the simulations. It
can be concluded that the voltage fluctuations of
the PV power source are responsible for the charging current of the module stray capacitances. The
insertion of long cables may be a source of interference, since the reflections of the travelling pulses
generated by the inverter may result in transient
overvoltages, a phenomenon extensively studied
for PWM drives and that may have similar effects
in power generation system using inverters.

Figure 15 Connection through long cables, transfomerless - units kV , A

References
Araneo, R., Lammens, S., Grossi, M. and
Bertone, S. (2009). Emc issues in highpower grid-connected photovoltaic plants,
IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility 51 639648.
Calais, M. and Agelidis, V. (1998). Multilevel converters for single-phase grid connected photovoltaic systems-an overview, IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics.
Proceedings. ISIE 98.
Cavalcanti, M. C., de Oliveira, K. C., de Farias,
A. M., Neves, F. A. S., Azevedo, G. M. S. and
Camboim, F. C. (2010). Modulation techniques to eliminate leakage currents in transformerless three-phase photovoltaic systems,
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics
57 13601368.

Acknowledgment
This project is funded by COELBA through
the ANEEL RD Program Chamada ANEEL
0132011, Research Grant number PD-004700602011.

1002

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

systems, Progress in Photovoltaics Research
and Applications 15 629650.
Guillot, M. (2012). Safe and reliable photovoltaic
energy generation, Schneider Electric.
Kerekes, T., Liserre, M., Teodorescu, R., Klumpner, C. and Sumner, M. (2009). Evaluation
of three-phase transformerless photovoltaic
inverter topologies, IEEE Transactions on
Power Electronics 24 22022211.

(a) Vp and Vm

Kerekes, T., Teodorescu, R. and Liserre, M.
(2008). Common mode voltage in case of
transformerless pv inverters connected to the
grid, IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics. ISIE 2008., pp. 2390
2395.

(b) Ileak

National Electrical Code (NEC) (2014).
Recommended Practice for Utility Interface of
Photovoltaic Systems (2000).
Rogalla, S. (2013). Three phase string inverters basic requirements, circuits, efficiency, development trends, OTTI seminar - Power Electronics for Photovoltaics, pp. 131158.

(c) Vf,inverter (blue) and Vf,P CC (green)

Schmidt, H. and Burger, B. (2013). Interactions between solar panels and inverters,
OTTI seminar - Power Electronics for Photovoltaics, pp. 387412.
Skibinski, G., Kerkman, R. and Schlegel, D.
(1999). Emi emissions of modern PWM AC
drives, IEEE Industry Applications Magazine
5 4780.

(d) Vf,inverter (blue) and Vf,P CC (green)

SMA (2012). Capacitive Leakage Currents, 2.2
edn.

Figure 16 Connection through long cables and a
conventional transformer - units kV , A

Takashima, T., Yamaguchi, J. and Ishida, M.
(2008). Fault detection by signal response in
PV module strings, 33rd IEEE Photovoltaic
Specialists Conference (PVSC).

De Paula, H., de Andrade, D., Chaves, M.,
Domingos, J. and de Freitas, M. (2008).
Methodology for cable modeling and simulation for high-frequency phenomena studies
in PWM motor drives, IEEE Transactions on
Power Electronics 23 744752.

Tran-Quoc, T., Colin, H., Duvauchelle, C., Gaiddon, B., Kieny, C., Le-Thi-Minh, C., Bacha,
S., Aissanou, S., Moine, G. and Tanguy, Y.
(2010). Transformerless inverters and RCD
Whats the problem?, 25th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition  5th World Conference on Photovoltaic
Energy Conversion, pp. 45544559.

Electrical installations of buildings - Part 7-712
Requirements for special installations or locations - Solar photovoltaic power supply systems (2002).

Vazquez, G., Kerekes, T., Rocabert, J., Rodriguez, P., Teodorescu, R. and Aguilar, D.
(2010). A photovoltaic three-phase topology
to reduce common mode voltage, 2010 IEEE
International Symposium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE), pp. 28852890.

Essakiappan, S., Enjeti, P., Balog, R. and Ahmed,
S. (2011). Analysis and mitigation of common mode voltages in photovoltaic power
systems, IEEE Energy Conversion Congress
and Exposition (ECCE), pp. 2835.

Wilhelm, C. (2013). Module integrated electronics, OTTI seminar - Power Electronics for
Photovoltaics, pp. 159171.

Guba, E., Sanchis, P., Ursua, A., Lopez, J.
and Marroyo, L. (2007). Ground currents
in single-phase transformerless photovoltaic

1003