Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROACTIVE SYSTEM MONITORS
BASED ON INTERMEDIATE THRESHOLD VALUES
LEANDRO P. BARBOSA, LEONARDO R. RODRIGUES, RODRIGO F. SOUTO
EMBRAER S.A.
Av. Brigadeiro Faria Lima, 2170, Putim, São José dos Campos  SP, 12227-901
E-mails leandro.barbosa@embraer.com.br, leonardo.ramos@embraer.com.br,
rodrigo.souto@embraer.com.br
 The high maintenance costs associated with the high availability indexes required by the aviation industry lead to
Abstract
the need of optimizing the usage of equipments installed in the aircraft. The application of PHM (Prognostics and Health Monitoring) technologies can be a powerful tool to support the maintenance planners to define the maintenance activities that shall be
performed. The estimated RUL (Remaining Useful Life) for each monitored equipment, obtained from a PHM system, can be
used in order to plan in advance for the repair of the equipment before a failure occurs. One important issue in the implementation of a PHM system is the amount of data that shall be transmitted from the aircraft to the ground station. This is important
due to the high costs associated with aircraft data transfer. The purpose of this paper is to introduce the concept of intermediate
threshold values for proactive system monitors. System monitors are a set of automatic tests performed within the aircraft systems in order to assure that the safety and maintenance requirements are satisfied. Each monitor has a threshold value that, when
exceeded, indicates a system failure. The implementation of intermediate threshold values may lead to a reduction in the amount
of data that needs to be transferred from the aircraft. A case study about the implementation of intermediate thresholds values in
a real life hardover monitor is presented.
Keywords
 Prognostics, Health Monitoring, Intermediate Thresholds, Proactive Monitors, Aircraft Maintenance.
Resumo
 Os altos custos de manutenção, associados com os altos índices de disponibilidade exigidos pela indústria aeronáutica, tornam necessário aperfeiçoar o uso dos equipamentos instalados nas aeronaves. A aplicação de técnicas de PHM (Prognostics and Health Monitoring) pode representar uma ferramenta poderosa para auxiliar os planejadores de manutenção na definição de quais tarefas de manutenção devem ser realizadas. A vida útil remanescente (RUL - Remaining Useful Life) estimada para cada equipamento monitorado, obtida de um sistema de PHM, pode ser usada para programar de forma preventiva o reparo de
um equipamento antes que este venha a falhar. Um aspecto importante da implantação de um sistema de PHM é a quantidade de
dados que serão transmitidos da aeronave para a estação de solo. Este aspecto é relevante em função dos altos custos associados
 transmissão_de_dados da aeronave. O objetivo deste artigo é apresentar o conceito de limiares_intermediários para monitores
pró-ativos de sistemas. Monitores de sistemas são um conjunto de testes automáticos realizados nos sistemas da aeronave com o
objetivo de garantir que os requisitos de segurança e de manutenção estão sendo atendidos. Cada monitor possui um limiar que,
quando ultrapassado, indica a falha de um sistema. A implementação de limiares_intermediários pode acarretar na redução da
quantidade de dados que necessitam ser transmitidos da aeronave. Um estudo de caso sobre a implementação de limiares_intermediários em um monitor real de hardover é apresentado.
Palavras-chave
 .

1

sensing network for aircraft structure monitoring.
Vieira et al. (2009) used a Support Vector Machine
(SVM) algorithm to detect degradation in an Auxiliary Power Unit (APU). Saha et al. (2011) presented a
Bayesian inference framework to assess the health
condition of batteries used in UAVs (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles).
PHM techniques may provide other opportunities to improve the aircraft maintenance planning.
The information generated by a PHM system can be
used to define the best moment to replace a degraded
component (Papakostas et al., 2010). Also, when a
failure occurs, identifying the failed component is
often a complex and time consuming task. PHM information can be used as a support tool for a faster
and more accurate troubleshooting.
The combination of all potential benefits mentioned above may lead to three important competitive
advantages for aircraft operators
 Improve flight operation performance
 Reduce operational cost
 Increase fleet availability

Introduction

Aircraft operators have shown growing interest
in PHM (Prognostics and Health Monitoring) systems due to the benefits and the competitive advantages that these systems can provide.
Vachtsevanos et al. (2006) defined PHM as the
ability of assessing the health state, predicting impending failures and forecasting the expected Remaining Useful Life (RUL) of a component or system
based on a set of measurements collected from the
aircraft systems. It comprises a set of techniques
which use analysis of measurements to assess the
health condition and predict impending failures of
monitored equipment or system.
Previous research showed the application of
PHM techniques for a wide set of aircraft components. Bizarria et al. (2009) developed a model-based
methodology to detect faults in an electro-hydraulic
actuator. Musiani et al. (2007) presented a wireless

3328

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

represented as a probability density function, as illustrated in Figure 1. Due to the operational characteristics of some equipment  such as tires and the braking system  it can be useful to express the remaining
useful life in terms of flight cycles. There is always a
confidence level associated with the predicted time
interval.

One important issue in the implementation of a
PHM system is the amount of data that shall be
transmitted from the aircraft to the ground station.
This issue is important due to the high costs associated with aircraft data transfer.
Since processing and storing a huge amount of
data in the aircraft may also be very expensive, determining which data shall be processed in the aircraft and which data shall be transferred to be processed in a ground station is a challenge faced by
PHM systems developers.
This paper introduces the concept of intermediate threshold values for proactive system monitors.
System monitors are a set of automatic tests performed within the aircraft systems in order to assure
that the safety and maintenance requirements are satisfied. Each monitor has a threshold value that, when
exceeded, indicates a system failure. The implementation of intermediate threshold values may lead to a
reduction in the amount of data that needs to be transferred from the aircraft.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces basic concepts of PHM
and IVHM. Section 3 describes the Built in Tests
(BITs) and the associated monitors. Section 4 presents the concepts of intermediate threshold values
and proactive monitors. A case study that illustrates
the implementation of intermediate threshold values
in a real aircraft system is presented in Section 5.
Finally, some conclusions and directions for further
research are given in Section 6.

Figure 1. Degradation evolution and instant of failure prediction

The term IVHM (Integrated Vehicle Health
Management) is commonly used when the information generated by a PHM system is used as a decision support tool. IVHM can be defined as the ability
of making appropriate decisions in both strategic and
tactical levels based on diagnosticsprognostics information, available resources, logistics information
and operational demand in order to optimize the efficiency of operation (Puttini, 2009).

2 PHM and IVHM Principles

3 Built in Tests and System Monitors

The goal of a PHM system is to estimate the future state of equipment and predict when a failure is
likely to occur (Roemer et al., 2005). In order to accomplish this task, it is necessary to collect a set of
data from the aircraft. The choice of the parameters
that will be recorded is based on the type of equipmentsystem to be monitored (hydraulic, electronic,
mechanic, structural, etc.) and the failure modes that
shall be covered by the PHM system. These factors
also guide the data collection specification (sample
rate, flight phase, etc.).
A health monitoring algorithm must be developed for each monitored system. Each algorithm processes the relevant data and generates a degradation
index that indicates how degraded the monitored system is. A degradation index can be generated for each
flight leg or for a defined period of time (a day, a
week, etc.).
In many cases it is possible to establish a threshold that defines the system failure. When the failure
threshold is known, it is possible to extrapolate the
curve generated by the evolution of the degradation
index over time and estimate a time interval in which
the failure is likely to occur (Leão et al., 2008
Kacprzynski et al., 2002). This estimation is usually

During the functional system architecture analysis, it was observed that the embedded health management monitoring of a system is covered by a set of
BIT (Built in Test) functions, usually represented as
follow





C-BIT (Continuous Built in Test)
P-BIT (Power Built in Test)
I-BIT (Initial Built in Test)
A-BIT (Automatic Built in Test)

Each group of tests mentioned above has associated monitors to assure that the safety and maintenance requirements are satisfied. Each monitor has a
threshold value that, when exceeded, indicates a system failure.
During a system monitor development, including
the thresholds values determination, the reactive approach is more employed and evident. With this reactive approach, systems abnormal conditions will be
indicated only after a fail occurs, allowing in flight
system reconfigurations and fails recording to post

3329

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

The intermediate threshold values definition
for the same monitor can reuse the reactive
threshold definition process.

analysis. Even when the traditional system monitors
perform their function correctly, the aircraft dispachability can be negatively affected.
This fact motivated the authors to define a new
monitor concept called "Proactive Monitor", which
follows the preventive concept from the PHM technology. This new type of monitor will be described in
the next section.

 No complex embedded algorithm For aircraft systems only monitors with "TRIP"
(predict and reactive limits values are
reached) logic are necessary to be implemented on the software, because all complex
algorithm and studies used for the threshold
definitions are allocated out of aircraft and
are not embedded.

4 Proactive Monitors and Intermediate
Threshold Values

 Recorded data information reduced for
predictive analysis It is not necessary to
record a huge amount of data to be analyzed
on ground. Only the intermediate thresholds
values are recorded. Depending of the architecture configuration, some data recorder
can be necessary to process the signal behavior and compare with these embedded
thresholds. After the comparison, the recorded data can be discarded.

The implementation of a proactive monitor follows the same process used to develop a reactive
monitor. The difference is in the definition of the
threshold values. While the traditional reactive monitors have only one threshold that indicates a system
failure, a proactive monitor will have a set of intermediate threshold values that will indicate that the
monitored system has reached a certain degradation
level.
An example of a proactive monitor with intermediate threshold values is illustrated in Figure 2. In
this example, the Exhausted Gas Temperature (EGT)
signal is monitored. The external gray markers indicate the threshold values used by the reactive monitor. The internal white markers indicate a possible set
of intermediate threshold values that could be used
by a proactive monitor. It is expected that the implementation of intermediate threshold values generates
a set of benefits for the aircraft operator. Some of
these benefits are listed in the following

 Smaller files to download In the proactive
monitor approach, the files containing health
information becomes smaller and can improve the wireless transfer speed.


Predictive messages on FHDB The intermediate threshold can be transformed on
FHDB (Fault History Data Base) messages,
keeping a unique database to register failures and predictive information.

 CMC degradation pages Since the predictive information is within the aircraft, it can
be processed and showed in display pages
that are available for mechanics and maintenance facilities.

 Natural growth scale in system application As part of system requirements and
development process, the engineers make
safety and maintenance analyses for monitors specification and implementation. These
analyses include reactive threshold values
definition to be embedded within the system.

Figure 2. Example of a proactive monitor and its intermediate threshold values

3330

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

4.1 Proactive Monitor Development Process

tification can be associated with an existing embedded heath monitoring monitor such as a P-BIT, an IBIT, an A-BIT or a C-BIT. Another possibility is to
create a new BIT to generate data and allow the degradation analyses through intermediate threshold value determination.
The fifth step consists in ensuring that the parameters associated with the proactive monitors are
available in the aircraft digital bus and can be accessed by the CMC (Central Maintenance Computer).
After that, the parameters can be processed by an
ACMF (Aircraft Condition Monitoring Function).
Another study necessary in this step is to know
how the aircraft integrated development process
works to allocate the monitor parameters to the digital buses. This knowledge is very important to define
the requirements to the supplier.
The sixth step consists to follow the ACMF improvements on the aircraft. This follow-up is relevant
in order to guarantee the proactive monitor efficiency
and the implementation of the requested requirements
on the supplier.
The ACMF is responsible to execute the following functions

The first step in the development of the proactive monitor consists on investigating the process to
develop a traditional reactive system monitor. This
investigation has the following main goals






Ensure that each relevant failure mode is
monitored
Improve the fault isolation
Define the monitor specification
Improve the system logic
Define the Built in Test specification

On the reactive monitor development process,
the component degradation shall be considered and
guaranteed, looking for reuse or news monitors development for this degradation analysis purpose.
Another important point is verifying if models
are used in the process to simulate the system functional architecture, including failure modes of the
components. With simulation through models, the
monitor specification is more accurate since the system is analyzed early on the integrated development
process.
Furthermore, the system integration model allows improving the system logic specification and the
fail cascading analysis. The system functional architecture models and the component failure mode analysis could be developed by the aircraft manufacturer
or by a supplier, using the FMEA (Failure Mode and
Effects Analysis) of the monitored components as
example.
The second step consists upon determining
which monitors are in the supplier and the aircraft
manufacturer responsibility and how their responsibility is defined.
One of the main objectives to work with proactive monitors is to better understand the aircraft integrated development process and how the monitors are
developed. One important issue to be investigated is
how the monitor threshold values are defined by the
supplier or by the aircraft manufacturer, besides what
methodologies are used.
The third step consists upon defining the intermediate threshold monitor values chosen to degradation analysis.
On the aircraft integrated development processes, data are generated through simulation models, test
benches and rigs. These data are statistically analyzed
and used to determine the reactive threshold value.
Monte Carlo simulation, ROC Curves and Six Sigma
are examples of statistical methods that could be used
to determine the reactive threshold values. A detailed
knowledge about the aircraft integrated development
processes is required for determining the intermediate
threshold values.
The fourth step consists upon defining a scenario and the conditions to analyze the proactive monitor
parameters. The chosen scenario and conditions iden-







Report Generation
Data recorder
Triggers conditions
Statistical Functions
Data process

The seventh step consists upon showing the positive impacts of the proactive monitor concept on
data collected from operators as well as the benefits
that arises from this implementation.
With the proactive monitor methodology the
recorded files are smaller, providing a faster and
lower cost data extraction to the ground station. It
becomes relevant when the required infrastructure for
the ground station is taken into account.
5 Case Study
In this section, a real case is used in order to illustrate the process of developing a proactive monitor, including the definition of the intermediate
threshold values. An aircraft MFS (Multi Function
Spoiler) system was chosen as a case study to follow
the steps listed in the previous section. This case
study comprises the main activities listed below
 Choice of one component from the MFS
system for degradation monitoring
 Study of the selected component failure
modes using FMEA or FMECA (Failure
Mode Effects and Criticality Analysis)
 Determination of the system monitors that
cover the selected failure modes

3331

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

 Study of the monitor development process to
understand how these monitors were specified to cover the component fail mode
 Understand the safety and maintenance requirements associated with the chosen monitors
 Study of the process and criteria of monitors
classification upon C-BIT, P-BIT, I-BIT, ABIT and others
 Identification of the monitors that are capable to be reused or the monitors that can be
proposed for degradation analyses purposes
 Study of the methods used to specify the reactive threshold values
 Definition of the intermediate threshold values
 Validation of the intermediate threshold values
 Study of the process to define the parameters
allocated on the digital bus and accessed by
the maintenance computer
 Study of the maintenance system specification regarding the parameters processing,
degradation analyses, parameters recording
and data transmission to ground.

(EHSA) responsible to convert the current command
from the REU to mechanical actuation. The EHSA
component was chosen to simulate degradation and
to verify the monitor actuation.
5.2 Monitor Definition
The monitor studied in this case is responsible
for hardover detection of the spoilers surfaces. The
hardover monitor is intended to detected failures
where the difference between the commanded position and the measured position of the spoiler surface
is higher than a given critical angle.
The hardover monitor design consists of a filter
which has an input composed by the error between
the commanded position and the measured position
of the surface, both in inches units. The filtered error
is then compared to a threshold to check if the hardover occurred.
5.3 Monitor Development Process
For the MFS error position analysis, some aspects were considered such as sensors deviation and
external loads on surfaces. The hardover monitor has
a first order filter with unit gain. The filter time constant was defined considering the tradeoff between
the failure detection time and noise robustness. In
other words, a lower time constant will provide more
sensitive failure detections, but will also result in a
monitor more susceptible to noise and disturbances.

5.1 System Definition
As mentioned earlier, the system selected to this
case study was the MFS (Multi Function Spoiler)
system. Basically the system is composed by a pilot
and a copilot command interface. These commands
are processed and conditioned by inceptors modules
and delivered to the FCC (Flight Control Computer)
and REU (Remote Electronic Unit), as illustrated in
Figure 3.

5.4 Reactive Monitor Threshold Definition
After the filter definition, the monitor threshold
was defined. The hardover monitor shall be able to
detected failures where the difference between the
commanded position and the measured position of
the spoiler surface is higher than the critical angle.
The most significant case in terms of falsenegative (i.e, the monitor does not warn a true hardover case) will happen when the error is close to the
critical angle. This situation represents the smallest
difference between the commanded signal and the
current position. The monitor shall be able to detect
the hardover even in this case.
The main false-positive cases (i.e., the monitor
detects a hardover that did not truly occur) occurs in
the following situations
 The monitor detects hardover for errors
lower and close to the critical angle. This
case will be considered during the design of
the monitor.
 The monitor detects hardover for amplitude
spikes caused by sensor imprecision or by
external perturbations, such as unpredicted
wind gusts. This case will be analyzed at the
design validation phase.

Figure 3. Flight Control System

The REU is responsible for the control law execution ensuring the correct command position of surface actuation. The PCUs (Power Control Unit) are
located between the REU and the MFS surfaces and
there is an Electronic Hydraulic Servo Actuator

3332

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

The thresholds were defined based on the filtered
error signal of each spoiler. The filtered error signals
were acquired through simulations. For these simulations, it was used the high fidelity model of the system. The parameters were defined to provide "Low
Gain" characteristics because in this case the hardover failure is less evident. After the first design of
the thresholds, these values shall be analyzed at a
"High Gain" scenario and checked if they pass the
requirements.
At this point, a simulation of a hardover will take
the spoiler to reach its maximum value. The pilot
input should take the surface to a given angle such
that a difference equal to the critical angle will appear between the spoiler position and its commanded
signal. Figure 4 shows the filtered error during the
simulation of the inboard spoiler.

Table 1 show that the failure detection time is
smaller for cases that present a greater difference
between the pilot input and the surface measurement.
For instance, it only takes 1.34 seconds to detect the
worst case hardover. However, when the discrepancy
is equal to the critical angle, the monitor needs 15
seconds to indicate the failure. One can also notice
that the monitor did not indicate a hardover for a difference smaller than the critical angle.
Figures 5 to 7 show, respectively, an example of
the difference between the pilot command and system
response, the error signal before the filtering stage
and the error system after the filtering stage.

Figure 5. Difference between pilot command and system response

Figure 4. Filtered error for a critical angle difference
at the inboard spoiler

By analyzing Figure 4, one can obtain its stationary value. The threshold was defined to avoid
incorrect failure indication. For this reason, based on
the monitor requirement, it is reasonable to consider
that a failure truly occurred when the surface presented a critical angle difference for about 15 seconds. In
fact, 15 seconds corresponds to 3 times the time constant. In other words, the filtered error already
reached 95 of its final value. Finally, the value of
the threshold for the inboard spoiler is calculated as

TIS  0,95  SE ,

(1)

Figure 6. Error signal (between pilot command and system response) before filtering

where TIS is the threshold for the inboard spoiler and
SE is the stationary error.
Table 1 shows the time necessary for failure detection for different pilot inputs.
Table 1. Failure Detection Times for Low Gain Inboard Spoiler
Pilot
Command
degrees

Difference between pilot
input and surface measurement degrees

Time until failure
detection seconds

0
11
21
28
31
33

 critical angle + 30
 critical angle + 20
 critical angle + 10
 critical angle + 3
 critical angle
< critical angle

1.34
2.00
3.32
6.58
15.0
inf

Figure 7. Error signal (between pilot command and system response) after filtering. The vertical line indicates the reactive
threshold position

3333

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

5.5 Intermediate Threshold Values Definition

37
37
36
36

After the definition of the reactive threshold value for the MFS hardover monitor, a study was performed in order to verify the possibility to embed
intermediate threshold values to this monitor reusing
the same process used to define the reactive threshold
value. In the intermediate threshold approach, it is
possible to identify anomalies in the system earlier.
In the spoiler hardover monitor study case, the intermediate threshold values were identified before the
critical angle for a position error.
Figure 8 illustrates one possibility to define intermediate threshold values for the hardover monitor.
The white arrows represent the intermediate threshold values. The gray arrow represents the original
reactive threshold value, which indicates a system
failure.

38
44
41
38

1
7
5
2

31
31
31

41
38
44

10
7
13

The simulation provided the following results
 Normal Behavior From 0 to 0.03 of the
critical angle
 Average Error 51 of the critical angle
 Standard Deviation 34 of the critical angle
 Reactive Threshold equal to the critical angle
The next step is to determine where the intermediate threshold values should be inserted. The hardover density function can be used in order to calculate the error values and their respective probabilities,
as shown in table 3.
Table 3. Hardover Values and Probabilities

Figure 8. Example of intermediate threshold values positions

In order to verify whether the orange points
should be considered as intermediate threshold
points, a set of simulations were performed. The main
goal of these simulations is to estimate the optimal
distance between the reactive threshold value determined by the system engineer and the normal behavior without hardover. Table 2 show the values of pilot
command used in the simulation, as well as the obtained system response.

Hardover
 of the critical
angle

Probability

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100

6.88
10.93
17.27
22.59
32.08
46.69
58.07
68.81
78.15
87.69
92.60

Table 2. Pilot Command, System Response and Hardover Errors

It was chosen to insert three intermediate thresholds, associated with hardovers of 40, 60 and
80 of the critical angle threshold.

System
System
Pilot
Pilot
Hardover
Hardover
Command Feedback
Command Feedback
degrees
degrees
degrees degrees
degrees degrees

5.6 Intermediate Threshold Values Validation

41
41
41
40
40
40
39
39
39
38
38
38
37

41
38
44
41
38
44
41
38
44
41
38
44
41

0
-3
3
1
-2
4
2
-1
5
3
0
6
4

36
35
35
35
34
34
34
33
33
33
32
32
32

44
41
38
44
41
38
44
41
38
44
41
38
44

In order to validate the intermediate threshold
values, an analysis was performed to verify the transition behavior of the error signal. The main goal of
this analysis is to verify whether a false alarm can be
triggered during the error signal transition.
Figure 9 shows some examples of the transition
of the error signal. When the surface is on its initial
stage command, during a short period of time there is
a false hardover occurrence. Then, the error signal
returns to values around zero. This effect occurs due
to the dynamic effects on the initial command.
In this case study, the maximum spurious error
observed during the simulations was 17 of the criti-

8
6
3
9
7
4
10
8
5
11
9
6
12

3334

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

cal angle, thus this value was not within the intermediate threshold values interval.

Acknowledgment
The authors acknowledge the support of CNPq (grant
4020002013-7).
References
Bizarria, C. O. and Yoneyama, T. (2009).
Prognostics and Health Monitoring for an
Electro-Hydraulic Flight Control Actuator. IEEE
Aerospace Conference, Big Sky.
Kacprzynski, G. J. Roemer, M. J. and Hess, A. J.
(2002). Health Management System Design
Development, Simulation and CostBenefit
Optimization. In Proceedings of IEEE Aerospace
Conference, Big Sky.
Leão, B. P. Yoneyama, T. Rocha, G. C. and
Fitzgibbon, K. T. (2008). Prognostics
Performance Metrics and their Relation to
Requirements, Design, Verification and CostBenefit. In Proceedings of International
Conference on Prognostics and Health
Management, Denver.
Musiani, D. Lin, K. and Rosing, T. S. (2007). Active
Sensing Platform for Wireless Structural Health
Monitoring. IEEE International Conference on
Information Processing in Sensor Networks,
Cambridge.
Papakostas, N. et al. (2010). An Approach to
Operational Aircraft Maintenance Planning.
Decision Support Systems, Vol. 48, pp. 604-612.
Puttini, L. C. (2009). Gerenciamento da Saúde de
Sistemas Aeronáuticos Conceitos e Visão de
Futuro. In Proceedings of VIII Sitraer, São
Paulo.
Roemer, M. J. Byington, C. S. Kacprzynski, G. J.
and Vachtsevanos, G. (2005). An Overview of
Selected
Prognostic
Technologies
with
Reference to an Integrated PHM Architecture. In
Proceedings of the First International Forum on
Integrated System Health Engineering and
Management in Aerospace.
Saha, B. et al. (2011). Battery Health Management
System for Electric UAVs. IEEE Aerospace
Conference, Big Sky.
Vachtsevanos, G. Lewis, F. L. Roemer, M. Hess,
A. and Wu, B. (2006). Intelligent Fault
Diagnosis and Prognosis for Engineering
Systems. In 1st ed. Hoboken.
Vieira, F. M. and Bizarria, C. O. (2009). Health
Monitoring Using Support Vector Classification
on an Auxiliary Power Unit. IEEE Aerospace
Conference, Big Sky.

Figure 9. Error signal transition

6 Conclusions
This paper presented the concept of proactive
monitors. The implementation of this type of system
monitor requires the definition of intermediate
threshold values and may lead to a set of benefits for
aircraft operators regarding health monitoring data
processing and transfer.
One important characteristic of the proposed
proactive monitor is that its implementation follows
the same process used to develop a reactive monitor.
The only difference is in the definition of the threshold values. While the traditional reactive monitors
have only one threshold that indicates a system failure, a proactive monitor will have a set of intermediate threshold values that will indicate that the monitored system has reached a certain degradation level.
It reduces the impact of the implementation of proactive monitor in the current system monitor development process.
A case study about the implementation of intermediate thresholds values in a real life hardover monitor was presented. This case study showed that it is
possible to aggregate embedded intermediate threshold values at the traditional reactive system monitors.
The intermediate threshold values definition becomes
more robust when high fidelity system models are
available. Other parameters such as sensors errors
and external system interferences can be taken into
account in order to improve the intermediate threshold values definition process.

3335