XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

A HALF-BRIDGE SWITCHED-LINEAR CONVERTER
DALTON, L. R. VIDOR
Centro Universitário Ritter dos Reis, ULBRA, UFSM e Ideia1
Rua José Grimberg, 90 - CEP 91.180-650, Porto Alegre - RS, Brasil
E-mailsdvidor@cpovo.net
PAULO CÉSAR GODOY
Departamento de Engenharia Elétrica, ULBRA HCPA
E-mails pcgodoy@portoweb.com.br
EVERTON ROSA
GEPOC, UFSM HP Eletricidade
E-mails everton@hpeeltricidade.com.br
NATANIEL RIGO
GEPOC, UFSMATEC
E-mails natanielrigo@terra.com.br
JOSÉ RENES PINHEIRO
GEPOC, UFSM
E-mails jrenes@gepoc.ufsm.br
Abstract This article presents a half-bridge hybrid converter named Switched-Linear (SL) that can operate as a DC-DC, DCAC or AC-DC converter. The linear power unit is a power amplifier, which is fed by two tracking power supplies to boost the efficiency of the linear unit without scarifying any virtues of linear power amplifier. It can be achieved by making the voltage in
the linear amplifier the lowest possible level and adequate to application. The main goal of this work is to guarantee the possibility of draining reversal power energy whenever it processes reversal power flux andor non-resistive loads and maintain high efficiency. Therefore, by combining the linear power amplifier with the switched power amplifier, the system has synthetic performance of high fidelity, high efficiency and excellent dynamic characteristics.
Keywords switched-linear, hybrid, high fidelity, excellent dynamic characteristic, high efficiency.
Resumo Este artigo apresenta um conversor híbrido meia-ponte chamado Switched - Linear (SL) que pode operar como um
conversor DC-DC, DC-AC ou AC-DC. A unidade linear é um amplificador de potência, o qual é alimentado por duas fontes de
alimentação para aumentar a eficiência da unidade linear, sem nenhuma perda das virtudes do amplificador linear. Isto pode ser
alcançado fazendo a tensão do amplificador linear o nível mais baixo possível e adequado para a aplicação. O objetivo principal
deste trabalho é garantir a possibilidade de drenar a energia reversa sempre que houver fluxo de energia reversa eou cargas não
resistivas e manter a eficiência_elevada. Portanto, com a combinação do amplificador de potência linear e do amplificador de potência chaveado, o sistema tem um desempenho com alta_fidelidade, eficiência_elevada e excelentes características dinâmicas.
Palavras-chave .

1

Introduction

The thermionic effect was patented by Thomas
Edison in 1883, after this John Fleming, in 1905,
patented a diode valve (Fleming, 1905). Robert Lien,
in 1906, and Lee De Forest, in 1907, introduced a
triode valve (Lieben, 1906) and improve this
valve(Forest, 1907), respectively. Then, with a triode
valve tube, is possible to built a completely electronic
equipment without electromechanical actuators. In
the following decades the electronic systems that
were developed were basically linear amplifiers used
in audio, telegraphs, telephones and radio systems.
The Class A and B amplifiers are produced and analyzed by many authors like (Nelson, 1933) - (Barton,
1932), however the triode vacuum tube were not attractive to design switched converters because the
voltage in the operation as an on switch is high.

ISSN 2525-8311

In 1925 Julius E. Lilienfeld patented the principle of field effect transistor (Lilienfeld, 1925) however the industry did not invest on it. In December of
1947, John Bardeen and Walter Houser Brattain invented the bipolar transistor (Arns, 1998) and then
the power electronics converters area had a device
that could operate similar as a switch. The thyristor
was proposed by William Shockley in 1950, in 1956
it was developed by power engineers at General Electric. With thyristors some loads could yield chopped
voltage and in the following years a lot of commutated converters are proposed (Bedford, 1964) (Gyugyi,
1976). The switched converters and linear converters
designs start to be focused by different engineers, one
with audio or radio frequency emphasis and other
with motion and energy conversion emphasis.
In the 70s the industry realized that the MetalOxide-Semiconductor
Field-Effect
Transistor
(MOSFET) could be integrated in a simple process
resulting in more devices being packed into a single
2407

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

device. The power MOSFET devices benefited from
this and the frequency of the converters increase.
In the following years, the power electronics industry discovered different devices that operate in
higher frequencies and improve dynamic responses,
efficiency, and power density. Researchers published
papers about structures that employ hard or soft
switching, resonant or with auxiliary circuits, two,
three or multilevel converters, constant or variable
frequency, current or voltage controlled, etc. (Bose,
2005). In the linear converters area, the D, E, F, G,
H, I, J and K Classes were developed in the following
five decades after 50s years. The development of the
aforementioned technology demonstrates that the
semiconductor led the evolution of the area of power
electronics as well as linear power converter technology. However, when devices that could operate as a
switch became available, the first area grew more
than the other or have more interest than the other.
Generally, both linear and commutated converters are
able to manage or produce linear signals. For linear
converters, this is done in a dissipative form, while
with commutated converters, linear signals are managed or produced in a dynamically limited form.
To produce energy is a challenge then the management must be done as most efficient as possible.
The customers want an electronic equipment that
works perfectly however electromagnetic interferences conducted or irradiated frequently disturb some
electronic apparatus. It charges the design to select
and achieve filters, controls and topologies to reduce
noises. This paper shows that hybrid topologies are
suitable to avoid the noise and could operate with
high efficiency. The linear converter is placed in a
configuration that could cancel the noise in the interface with the load and the switched converters could
manage the dissipated power over the linear converter controlling the voltage across it. The article discusses the limits of semiconductors and shows that
the hybrid converters could help us improve the energy conversion.

Figure 1. Semiconductor power and frequency limits.

Figure 2. Application and switch, power and frequency ranges.

It is possible to identify hybrid structures in the
market that improve its equipment. In high power
soft-starters, there is a relay in parallel with a thyristor, the operation is coordinated in order to reduce
the thyristor thermals effects. It is a hybrid structure
that mix semiconductors and electromechanical
switches. Class G audio amplifiers employed in telephones and audio systems are hybrid structures that
avail the nearest level of output signal, they are employed in order to improve the efficiency and maintain the dynamic response of the system. There are
many other applications that could be analyzed as a
hybrid structure and this paper will present and discuss a single phase inverter. Other works present
similar structures and discuss the solutions like
(Beltrame, 2011)  (Gong, 2011).
3 Converter Structure

2 Hybrid Converters Region
Figure 1 shows for discrete devices as presented
in reference (Hower, 2010), the power handling capability ranges from 10 to 100M VA over a frequency range from 10s of Hz up to 1MHz.
As shown in Figure 2, the ranges were extended.
This figure presents the main topologies and the principal kinds of switches found in various applications.
In the Figure 2 the red arrow indicates that to increase the power of the apparatus the efficiency must
be increased, for this reason, switched converters are
suitable. The blue arrow indicates that the improvement of dynamic response, like in radio amplifiers,
the linear converters are needed. Finally, the green
arrow indicates that to improve both, hybrid topologies that employ linear and switched converters, are
the best option.
ISSN 2525-8311

The concept is to produce two voltage supplies
as closed as possible to the output voltage. These
voltages have to be adequate to maintain the amplifier into the linear operation, so that it is guaranteed
the performance of linear amplifiers. Figure 3 presents the desired waveforms and the shape of output
voltage as suggested by Kashiwagi (Kashiwagi,
1985).

Figure 3. Desired output waveform of Amplifiers.

2408

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

George B. Yundt (Yundt, 1986 and Yundt,
1984) shows some equivalent circuits. One of them is
composed by two voltage sources in series, as shown
in figure 4. where it is possible to obtain a sinusoidal
output with low harmonic content. Here the name
was changed to Switched Converter to characterize
the sources that process more energy, the second
source was called Filter Converter which acts as an
active filter or adjust the shape of output wave.

to manage direct and reversal energy flux in the output.
4 Operational Mode
The converter shown in Figure 6 will be analyzed.
The switched apparatus must to generate the DC
voltage inside the converter to supply the linear
amplifier. Therefore, the switched converter has to be
conceived to achieve this goal.

Figure 4. Series Equivalent Circuit.

Figure 6. Proposed Half-Bridge of SL Converter.

4.1 Review of Class AB Power Amplifiers
Figure 5. Series Equivalent Circuit with Switched and Linear
Converters.

The concept adopted in this paper is similar to
arrangement shown above as presented in Figure 5.
Two DC supply voltages Va and Vb are small in relation to the output voltage in order to increase the efficiency of linear converter, so that it processes a small
portion of the total power converter. This two supplies will be made by two buck converter.
One way to conceive a converter according with
this concept is to connect two half-bridge or Synchronous Buck converters. Both switched converters
must have reversal power capability. By analysis of
this structure it is possible to integrate two switched
converters in one reducing one, reducing one switching as presented in Figure 6.
As mentioned earlier the offset voltages that
supply Q1 and Q2, indicated as Va and Vb in Figure 6,
are relatively small, but great enough to maintain the
adequate linear operation of the amplifier. Another
improvement of this converter is that when the output
voltage is positive and the output current is negative,
Q2 is managing the current and shape of the output
and when the output voltage is negative and the output current is positive, Q1 is controlling the output
voltage shape and the current, then the voltage across
this transistors Q1 and Q2 must not be great to
achieve high efficiency. The switches SW1, SW2 and
SW3 are commanded to generate the proper levels and

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 7. Conventional class AB power amplifier.

The Class AB were extensively discussed in the
past, nowadays, it is found in a large number of
books and papers about audio amplifiers and radio
systems (Slone, 1999). Frequently linear power amplifiers adopt the couple pair NPN and PNP transistors or channel N and channel P MOSFETs to implement a Class AB amplifier. In this class of amplifiers, the power dissipated in the transistors depends
on the output current and the voltage difference between output and the supply voltages +Vcc and -Vcc.
When reactive loads are connected at output, it is
managed by Q1 or Q2 according to the output current
direction. For resistive loads and when the output
voltage is positive, current flows through Q1, on the
other hand, when the output voltage is negative it
flows through Q2. In these cases, the voltage across
the transistors is reduced as the output voltage increases. This leads the converter to reduce the power
dissipation, if the current is in phase an increasing of
the converter efficiency increases. However, for non2409

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

resistive loads, the voltage and current could be in
opposite polarity. In this situation, the converter efficiency is reduced. For example, when positive output
voltage and negative output current occurs, Q2 is
driven to shape the output voltage. The voltage
across the transistor increases and its dissipated energy also increases. For negative output voltage and
positive output current, the power dissipated by the
transistor Q1 is penalized in similar way as described
to Q2. The voltages Vpol are the sources that cancel
the Vbe (base-emitter) polarization voltages. These
voltages and a simple proportional feedback loop in
the linear amplifier could produce an output voltage
without crossover or harmonic distortion.
4.2 The class of switched-linear converters
The converter analysis was shown in the paper
"A new class of switched-linear converter" (Vidor et
all, 2015). In this paper only main descriptions and
equations are presented.
The power dissipated in each transistor of the
linear amplifier is
PQ1  Va. I+LoadAVG
(1)
PQ2  Vb. I-LoadAVG

(2)

For sinusoidal output current and if Va and Vb are
equal, its average current and dissipated power are
I+LoadAVG I-LoadAVG  1 .ILoadPEAK (3)
PDISS  Va . 2 . ILoadPEAK

(4)

The output currents used in these equations are
half-wave average and peak currents. Va and Vb are
the capacitors voltages as indicated in Figure 6.
The strategy command of switched power converter is shown by figure 8.

Figure 9. Converter behavior versus frequency.

The figure 12 shows the converter behavior. The
output levels at small frequencies are limited by the
supply voltage and at high frequencies the envelopment level and the linear bandwidth response are the
limits.
In the switched converter are included filters that
limit the maximum output power at a specific frequency, called cutoff frequency Fc. After this frequency the output voltage is reduced in the same ratio
in which the frequency increases. From the circuit
analysis behavior is met the following L1 and L2 relationship
(7)
L1L2 0,35.Rmin(2..Fc)
Where Rmin is the minimum resistance for maximum load which the converter will process. When
the frequency increases and voltage is reduced until a
level close to "2.Va". The switched converter could
generate only the envelopment of the output level and
the Fe is found. After this frequency, the bandwidth
limit will be the same of the linear converter. The
enveloped Va could be increased in order to achieve
higher levels at high frequencies. This mode of operation will decrease the converter efficiency, it concerns an important degree of freedom of this converter.
The capacitance is derivate to taking into account the maximum voltage ripple over the envelop
wide.
(8)
C1C2  E1(16.VRipple.L1.fsw2)

5 Design, Simulations and Results

Figure 8. Strategy of SW1, SW2 and SW3 Commands

The proposed strategy presents two switches
closed at all times. This is not the unique way to perform the control of the converter, nevertheless it is
used because it leads to maintain into a voltage level
across the filters L1-C1 and L2-C2.
The voltage across the capacitors C1 and C2 are
Va  (t2 . E1) - (T - t2 ). E2   T (5)
Vb    (t2-t1) . E1 - (T - t2 + t1 ). E2    T 
As depicted by the equations above the time t1
could control the sinusoidal shape and time t1 could
control the difference between Va and Vb.

ISSN 2525-8311

The design procedure is performed as follows
a) Choose the values of the supply voltage,
peak output voltage, cutoff frequency, rms output
power, switching frequency and maximum dissipated
power in the linear converter
E1 and E2 200V
Peak Output Voltage 180V
Cutoff Frequency 1,5kHz
Output Power 5kVA
Switching Frequency 50kHz
Maximum dissipated power in the linear converter 150W (3)
b) Obtain the Va Vb using equation (4)
Va 4.25V
c) Observe the current slopes and use the
equation (7)
2410

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

L1L2240uH
d) Choose the maximum voltage ripple in C1
and C2 about 30 of the DC level Va . Using equation
(8)
C1C216uF
Then the Half-Bridge Switched-Linear Converter
was simulated making the use of these components
values. Where SW1, 2,3, switches have been assumed
as ideal switches. Q1 and Q2 are the bipolar transistors with hfe  75 (hybrid parameters), hie  hoe  hre
0.
The load has been simulated as a resistor and inductor for the linear load or a non-linear load composes by a diode rectifier with a capacitive filter and
a resistor. These results have been performed by
making the use of conventional PI feedback loop for
the switched power converter. In the linear power
amplifier just bias polarization has been performed.
The figure 13 presents the output voltage
(127V@60Hz), Va and Vb voltages for an inductive
load and the output voltage and current for non-linear
load.

6 Experimental Results
The experimental results are obtained in a similar structure presented in Figure 14. The linear amplifier is in the other side of half-bridge. This structure
not need two switched converters and is simple to
show and prove the concept. The output voltage is
produced by a PWM open loop signal and the linear
converter is a Class AB MOSFET amplifier with a
proportional feedback.

Figure 12. Experimental results.

The half-bridge uses IGBTs SKM75GDL123D
and driver SKHI22A. The linear is performed with
STB80N55 and IRF4905. The switching frequency
was limited in 6kHz, L240uH, C125uF,
VaVb5V. The maximum ripple caused by switching
voltage over the capacitor is about 6V. The results
were obtained with resistive load and 1kW.
Figure 13 and 14 shows the preliminary experimental result. The two voltages are the voltage in the
LC filter and the output voltage with resistive load.
The linear converter avoid the high and low frequency distortions in the LC filters.

Figure 10. Output voltage and current with reactive load.

Figure 13. Experimental results.

Figure 11. Output voltage and current for non-linear load.

The simulation results are presented to confirm
the good performance of the converter. It is shown
that the output voltage is clean and close of a perfect
sinus. The Half-Bridge SL converter could process
either non-linear load or non-resistive load with high
fidelity for a required reference input signal. The
losses estimated of the linear converter is something
like 3 in order to achieve the expected performance.

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 14. Output voltages - Vload (blue) Filter Voltage (yellow)

2411

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

The challenges founded are the bandwidth of
linear stage must be high, the controller must not
introduce phase displacements in the control signal,
the linear crossover must be reduced to zero and the
voltage across the linear must be lower however sufficient maintain the linear amplifier in the linear
region.
7 Conclusions
This paper presents a Half-bridge switchedlinear converter which could operate as a DC-DC as
a DC-AC converter. The main switched-linear converter characteristics could be highlighted as high
fidelity high dynamic response reversal power flux
capability the auxiliary voltage need by the linear
amplifier is performed in an easy way one linear
amplifier the DC auxiliary voltages could manage
reversal flux the dissipated power in the linear amplifier could be controlled by the offset voltage level
across the capacitors the class of SL Converters has
been presented, however it can be performed with
any others structures or converters power switches
could be replaced by multilevel cell to improve the
performance and to reduce filters the linear amplifier suppresses the voltage ripple error presented on
switched converter filter the linear converter losses
are proportional to the positive and negative average
current and it is a function of load current.
It has been presented the basic relationships for
the design of a combining of linear power amplifiers
with switched mode power converters. The control
structure must be improved in order to produce better
results, however the concept has been presented.
References
Arns, R.G., "The other transistor early history of the
metal-oxide
semiconductor
field-effect
transistor", IEEE Engineering Science and
Education Journal, Year 1998, Vol. 7, No. 5,
pp. 233-240, 1998.
Barton, Loy E., "Application of the Class B audio
amplifierto A-C operated rectifiers", Proceedings
of the Institute of Radio Engineers, pp. 10851100, vol. 20, n. 7, Jul. 1932.
Bedford, B.D.  Hoft, R.G. "Principles Of Inverter
Circuits". New York John Wiley  Sons, 1964.
Beltrame, R.C.  da Silva Martins, M.L., Rech, C. and
Hey, H.L. " Hybrid Power Amplifiers  A
Review",
Brazilian
Power
Electronics
Conference - COBEP, pp. 189 - 195, 2011.
Bose, B.K, "Power Electronics and Motor Drives Technology
Advances,
Trends
and
Applications", IEEE International Conference on
Industrial Technology, ICIT 2005, 20052064.
Dewan, S. B.,and Straughen, "A Power
semiconductor Circuits". New York John Wiley
 Sons, 1975.

ISSN 2525-8311

Fleming, J. A., November 1905, US 803,684 patent.
"Instrument for Converting Alternating Electric
Currents into Continuous Currents", New Jersey.
Forest, L., January 1907, US 841,386 patent.
"Wireless Telegraphy", New York.
Forest, L., January 1907, US 841,387 patent. "Device
for Amplifying Feeble Electrical Currents", New
York.
Gong, G., Hassler, D. and Kolar, J., Comparative
study of multi-cell amplifiers for ac power
source applications, IEEE Trans. Power
Electron.,vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 149164, Jan. 2011.
Gyugyi, L.,and Pelly, B. R. "Static Power Frequency
Changes". New York John Wiley  Sons, 1976.
Hower, P. L.,Pendharkar, S. and Efland, T., " Current
status and future trends in silicon power
devices", Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM),
2010 IEEE International, pp. 13.1.1 - 13.1.4,
2010.
Kashiwagi, Seigoh, "A High-Efficiency Audio Power
Amplifier Using a Self-Oscillating Switching
Regulator", IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. vol. IA 21, no. 4, pp. 906911, JulAug. 1985.
Lieben, R. V., March 1906, DRP 179807 patent.
"Kathodenstrahlenrelay", Vien.
Lilienfeld, J. E., October 1925, US 1,745,175 patent.
"Method and Apparatus for Controlling Electric
Currents", Canada.
McMurray, William. "The Theory and Design of
Cycloconverters".Cambridge, MA MIT Press,
1972.
Nelson, J. R., "Class B amplifiers considered from
the conventional Class A standpoint",
Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers,
pp. 858-874, vol. 21, n. 6, Jun. 1933.
Pelly, B. R. "Thyristor Phase-Controlled Converters
and Cycloconverters Operation, Control, and
Performance", 1st Edition. New York John
Wiley  Sons, 1971.
Slone, G. R., High-Power Audio Amplifier
Construction Manual, McGraw-Hill, New York,
1999.
Vidor, D. R. L., Godoy, P. C. C., Rosa, E., Pinheiro,
J. R., "A New Class of Switched-Linear
Converters", 2015 IEEE 13th Brazilian Power
Electronics Conference and 1st Southern Power
Electronics Conference (COBEPSPEC), Pages
1 - 6, 2015.
Yundt, G. B., Series- or parallel-connected
composite amplifiers, IEEE Trans. Power
Electron., vol. PE-1, n. 1, pp. 4854, Jan. 1986.
Yundt, G. B., Series- or parallel-connected
composite amplifiers, PESC 1984, Power
Electronic Specialists, pp. 121124, 1984.

2412