Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

HIGH STEP-UP DCDC INTEGRATED FLYBACK TOPOLOGIES
FILIPE MARANGONI, JORGE L. R. ORTIZ
Federal University of Technology - Parana
VIA DO CONHECIMENTO, KM 1, 85503-390  PATO BRANCO, PR, BRAZIL
E-MAILS fi.marangoni@gmail.com, jlroelortiz@yahoo.com.br
CASSIANO RECH, MÁRIO L. DA S. MARTINS
Federal University of Santa Maria
AV. RORAIMA, N 1000, 97105-900  SANTA MARIA, RS, BRAZIL
E-MAILS rech.cassiano@gmail.com, mariolsm@gmail.com
JACSON R. DREHER
Federal Institute of Santa Catarina
Av. Nereu Ramos 3450 D - Bairro Seminário, 89813-000  Chapecó, SC, Brazil
E-mails jacson@ifsc.edu.br
HELDER T. CÂMARA, LEANDRO DELLA FLORA
Control Engineering Department, Danfoss Drives
Grasten, Denmark
E-MAILS contato@htc.eng.br
Abstract This paper presents a new methodology to generate high step-up voltage gain converters based on the combination of
a standard DCDC converter and a flyback. The converters are combined so that their Input sections are integrated reducing the
converter component count. Their Output sections are associated to derive three basic configurations, the series, the parallel and
the cascade outputs. The paper presents as an example, the integration of the boost and flyback converters with experimental results.
Keywords DCDC converter, Converter Integration.
Resumo Este artigo apresenta uma nova metodologia para gerar conversores CCCC com alto_ganho_de_tensão baseada na
combinação de um conversor CCCC convencional e um conversor_flyback. Os conversores são combinados de forma que as suas Seções de Entrada sejam integradas, reduzindo o número de componentes e as suas Secões de saída sejam associadas em série, paralelo ou cascata. O artigo apresenta como exemplo a integração dos conversores_boost e flyback com resultados experimentais.
Palavras-chave .

1 Introduction
Nowadays, power electronics converters have
been present in a large variety of electronic products
and applications. Hence, they have been exposed to a
very wide different set of constrains and limitations
that have promoting the development of new components and materials (Egelkraut, 2010), new topologies, circuit designs and control strategies (Goodwin,
2010). Some of the new challenges concern converters in systems supplied by batteries or solar panels
with maximum power tracking and wide conversion
range (Barreto, 2012) features. The converters with
wide conversion range are usually achieved with
cascade, (Morales, 2002), (Aamir, 2010), series or
parallel (Jiang, 1994), (Chen, 2011) connections of
two (or more) existing converters additive or subtractive stacking at the output ends of converters
(Choi, 1991) energy recirculation (Hopkins, 1994)

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

modified converter cells (Luo, 2001) voltage multiplier cells, (Berkovich, 2008), (Prudente, 2008) or
coupled-inductor topologies (Li, 2012).
Besides the great number of topologies, and
techniques to obtain wide conversion range, very few
is said about the methods to derive the topologies,
which are presented as sole alternatives to alleviate
disadvantages of some other.
Aiming to present a concise analysis about the
use of coupled-inductors to obtain integrated high
step-up DCDC converters, this paper proposes a
novel methodology to generate high step-up voltage
gain converters based on the combination of a nonisolated standard DCDC topology and the flyback
converter. The coupled DCDC non-isolated converter inductor and the transformer of the flyback
converter are integrated on a single magnetic core,
allowing to the integration of the magnetic components and also the switches, yielding in a topology
with low component count. The standard DCDC
converter and flyback converter output terminals are
3672

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

connected in cascade, series or parallel to increase
the output voltage gain.
2 Synthesis of Integrated Flyback Topologies
As proposed by (Liu,1988), the standard DCDC
converters can be viewed as a planar ladder structure
comprised by three sections, Input section, Middle
section, and Output section, where the power flows
from the source (Input section) to the load (Output
section). The middle section comprises the energy
buffer of the converter, i.e., the capacitor andor inductor in the Middle section store energy for an interval of time and deliver this energy back to the
circuit in another. This way, each section that is part
of a converter can be handled individually to yield in

(a)

(b)

either integration or association with other converter
section. Normally, the Input sections of the two converters can be associated with each other, as well as
their Output sections. On the other hand, the Middle
sections can be shared with two converters.
Figure 1 shows the six topologies for the standard DCDC converters pointing out their sections.
The input sections can be of voltage type, comprised
by the input voltage source Vi and the switch S (Figure 2(a)) or of current type, comprised by the input
voltage source Vi, the switch S and the inductor L
(Figure 2(b)). In the same way, the output sections
can be of voltage type, consisting of the diode Do,
the output capacitor Co and the load R (Figure 2(c))
or of current type, comprised by the diode Do, the
output capacitor Co, the inductor Lo and the load R
(Figure 2(d)).
It can be seen from Figure 2(a) and Figure 2(b)
that three topologies (boost, Cúk and SEPIC) with
step-up capability present a current type input section
and other two (buckboost and Zeta) present an inductor in the middle section directly connected to their
voltage type input sections. Hence, a common current type input section for standard DCDC with
step-up characteristic can be defined, Figure 2(e).
In a similar way, from Figure 2(c) and Figure
2(d), it can be concluded that three topologies (buck,
Cúk and Zeta) with step-down capability present an
current type output section and other two (buckboost
and SEPIC) present an inductor in the middle section
directly connected to their voltage type output sections. Thus, a common current type output section
for standard DCDC with step-down characteristic

(c)
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(d)

(e)
(e)

(f)
(f)
Figure 1. Standard DCDC non-isolated converters. (a) Buck (b)
Boost (c) Buckboost (d) Cúk (e) SEPIC (f) Zeta.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Figure 2. Input and output sections. (a) Voltage type input (b)
Current type input (c) Voltage type output (d) Current type output (e) Common current type input (f) Common current type
output.

3673

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

(a)

(a)

(b)

(b)

(c)
Figure 3. Integrated topologies. (a) Integrated boost-buckboost
converter with single input (b) Integrated Cúk-Zeta converter with
single input (c) Integrated buck-buckboost converter with single
output.

can be generated, as shown in Figure 2(f).
2.1 The Integration concept
From the input and output sections perspective,
since two or more standard DCDC converters can
operate with synchronized PWM modulation, they
can share a single Input section when they comply
with one of the following condition
 Their input voltage source is the same
 All input sections are of voltage type
 All input sections are of current type
 They share a common current source input.
Analogously, since two or more DCDC converters operate with synchronized PWM modulation,
they can share a single output section if they comply
with the following condition
 Their output voltage sink is the same
 All output sections are of voltage type
 All output sections are of current type
 They can share a common current sink output.
Figure 3 illustrates the integration concept with
three examples. Figure 3(a) shows the integrated
boost-buckboost converter with single input section
Figure 3(b) depicts the integrated Cúk-Zeta converter
with single input section and Figure 3(c) shows the
buck-buckboost converter with single output section.
It can be seen that in both converters of Figure 3(a)
and Figure 3(b), there is no association of the two
outputs. In the same way, the converter of Figure
3(c) does not associate its input sections. It means
that the integration of one converter section do not
imply in the association of the other sections.
2.2 The Flyback inputoutput sections
The flyback converter can be viewed as a counterpart
of the buckboost topology with galvanic isolation.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Figure 4. Flyback circuit. (a) Flyback circuit with input, middle
and output sections (b) Integrated current type input section with
flyback primary side.
Table 1. Combinations of the Input sections for the Flyback.
DCDC converter

Common Current
type Input terminals

buckboost
Zeta
boost
Cúk
SEPIC

u-x
u-x
x-y
x-y
x-y

Integrated Flyback
Topology
buckboost-flyback
Zeta-flyback
boost-flyback
Cúk-flyback
SEPIC-flyback

The diagram of the flyback converter is shown in
Figure 4(a), where the isolation transformer appears
in the middle section. The magnetizing inductance
LM is shown in the primary side of the transformer
and it acts as an energy buffer. The main advantage
of the isolated topology is that its inputoutput section can be placed in any position in the integrated
circuit. Figure 4(b) shows the Common current type
input Section with the flyback primary side (input
and middle sections). This Common current type
input section can generate five integrate flyback topologies as described in Table 1. It is observed that
only the buck converter cannot be integrated since it
neither has an inductor in the input section nor in its
middle section.
2.3 The Association concept
In (Purwadi, 2009) a new approach to synthesize
power converter based on the combinational form of
two-port network was presented. The standard
DCDC converters are represented as two-port networks and only their terminals variables, input and
output voltages and currents are regarded. Hence,
any non-isolated or isolated converter can be represented by a two-port network since their terminals
voltage and current could be assessed. The four possible combinations resulting from this approach are
a. Parallel inputs and Parallel outputs b. Parallel
inputs and Series outputs c. Series inputs and Parallel outputs and d. Series inputs and Series outputs. It
can be observed that the Integrated current type input
Section is a combination of a flyback input section

3674

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

tot

(f)
Figure 5. Integrated flyback output section association. (a) Current
type output with series association (b) ) Voltage type output with
series association (c) Current type output with parallel association (d) Voltage type output with parallel association. (e) Current
type output with cascade association (f) Voltage type output with
cascade association.

and a standard DCDC converter input section (Table
1) in parallel.
Taking into account the converter sections instead of their inputoutput terminals, the output section of an isolated topology like the flyback can also
to be combined in a cascaded configuration of any
other output section. From this perspective there will
be three possible associations for the output sections
of the Integrated Flyback topologies a. Series outputs b. Parallel outputs and c. Cascade outputs.
The Input section characteristic for all Integrated
Flyback Topologies is given by (1).
(1)
V V V  I  I  I
iA

iF

i

3 Integrated DCDC Flyback Topologies
Following the output section association discussion, each of the integrated flyback topologies given
in Table 1 could derive in other three circuits, depending on the output sections association. These
topologies can be viewed as an entire family of converters, which are summarized in Table 2. For any of
the topologies, the voltage gain is given by,
(5)
G  G G

(e)

i

Figure 5(a) is the series association of the current type output section with a flyback converter.
Figure 5(b) is the series association of the voltage
type output section with a flyback converter. Figure
5(c) is the parallel association of the current type
output section with a flyback converter. Figure 5(d)
is the parallel association of the voltage type output
section with a flyback converter. Figure 5(e) is the
cascade association of the current type output section
with a flyback converter. Figure 5(f) is the cascade
association of the voltage type output section with a
flyback converter.

iA

DC

Fly

where, Gtot is the overall gain of the integrated converter GDC is the gain considering only the standard
DCDC converter output and GFly is the gain considering only the flyback converter output.
3.1 Integrated boost-flyback topologies.
In order to demonstrate the integration concept,
the boost converter has been chosen to be integrated
with the flyback. The three resulting topologies are
depicted in Figure 6(a), Figure 6(b) and Figure 6(c),
for the Series, Parallel and Cascade configurations,
respectively. For the Parallel Integrated boostflyback converter (Parallel-IBF), the terminal u has
been connected to node x. To analyze these circuits,
the coupled inductor is modeled as an ideal transformer (core losses neglected), which consists of a

iF

For the Parallel outputs (Figure 5(a,b)) the expressions (2) define its output characteristics.
(2)
V V V  I  I  I
o

oA

oF

o

oA

oF

For the Series output (Figure 5(c,d)) the following expression (3) defines its output characteristics.
(3)
V  V V  I  I  I
o

oA

oF

o

oA

oF

(a)

(b)

For the Cascaded output (Figure 5(e,f)) the output section characteristic is given by expressions (4).
(4)
V  V V  I  I  I
o

oA

oF

o

oA

oF

According to Figure 2(c) and Figure 2(d), the
possibilities to associate the flyback output section
with the standard DCDC converters listed in Table 1
are represented in Figure 5.
ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

(c)
Figure 6. Diagram of the Integrated boost-flyback converter with
Cantilever model for the coupled inductor. (a) Series outputs (b)
Parallel Outputs (c) Cascaded outputs.

3675

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Table 2. Family of Integrated Flyback Topologies.
DCDC converter

Output section association

Integrated Flyback Topology

buckboost

series
parallel
cascade
series
parallel
cascade
series
parallel
cascade
series
parallel
cascade
series
parallel
cascade

Series Integrated buckboost-flyback
Parallel Integrated buckboost-flyback
Cascaded Integrated buckboost-flyback
Series Integrated Zeta-flyback
Parallel Integrated Zeta-flyback
Cascade Integrated Zeta-flyback
Series Integrated boost-flyback
Parallel Integrated boost-flyback
Cascade Integrated boost-flyback
Series Integrated Cúk-flyback
Parallel Integrated Cúk-flyback
Cascade Integrated Cúk-flyback
Series Integrated SEPIC-flyback
Parallel Integrated SEPIC-flyback
Cascade Integrated SEPIC-flyback

Zeta

boost

Cúk

SEPIC

turns ratio (NN2N1), a magnetizing inductor L1 and
leakage inductance Lo2. The N-port representation of
the cantilever model is used as proposed in (Erickson, 1998).
Aiming to verify the theoretical analysis and the
integration methodology, three prototypes have been
implemented, one for each Integrated boost-flyback
converter derived in the previous section. In order to
compare the benefits and drawbacks, a comparative
experimental analysis had been carried out. The prototypes specifications take into account the data from
a standard PV module. The main specifications of
the prototypes parameters are summarized in Table
3.
It can be seen from Figure 7(a), that the prototype
with Series-IBF achieved the highest efficiency,
which was slightly better than the prototype with
Cascaded-IBF for almost entire irradiation range. On
the other side, the prototype with Parallel-IBF presented the worst efficiency. This difference is a result
of the higher conductions losses presented by the Parallel-IBF MOSFET. Since in this converter, the
switch is subjected to the entire output voltage, it
must be rated for a high voltage level than the Seriesand the Cascade-IBF prototypes. The MOSFET tech-

Voltage gain

Vo 1  N  D

Vi
1  D 

(6)

Vo 1  N  D

Vi
1  D 

(7)

Vo 1  ND

Vi 1  D 

(8)

Vo 1  N  D

Vi
1  D 

(9)

Vo 1  N  D

Vi
1  D 

(10)

nologies present a proportional relation between
breakdown voltage and on state resistance. Hence, the
Parallel-IBF will present a pour efficiency for high
output voltages due to the MOSFET characteristics.
From Figure 7(b) it can be noticed that the voltage gain of the Series- and Cascade-IBF are the
highest achieving more than 40, at 80 of dutycycle. At the same duty-cycle, the Parallel-IBF
reaches a gain of 22. The boost converter achieved a
voltage gain of 5, at 90 of duty-cycle. The ideal
IBF (expression (8)) has been also plotted to show
how much the converter actual ESR affect the results. For this application, a duty-cycle range smaller
than 0.5, the three IBF converters present similar
values for the voltage gain. Nevertheless, for very
high voltage gains at severe duty-cycles, the Series-

Table 3. Integrated Boost-Flyback prototypes parameters.
Symbol

Parameters
Description

(a)

Value

S (fs)

Coupledinductor
inductances
Core and turns
ratio
Switch
(frequency)

DoF, DoB

Diodes

Vi

Input voltage

26.7 26.4 25.9 25 24.1 V

Pi

Input power

191.3 153.5 112.9 76.3
36.1 W

Vo

Output voltage

250V

L1,Lk1,Lk2

Core (N)

45 H, 2.3 H, 2 nH
ETD 392013 (12)
IRF740*
(100kHz)
UF4006,
UF4002

,

IRF540

UF4004*

,

*. For Parallel-IBF prototype only.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Figure 7. Comparative experimental analyses. (a) Efficiency
curves (b) Voltage gain curves.

3676

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

and the Cascade-IBF prototypes are the best choice.
4 Conclusion
This paper presented a new methodology to generate
high step-up voltage gain converters based on the
integration of a standard DCDC converter and the
flyback. The converters are separate in three sections
named input, middle and output. Combining their
input sections, two different converters can be integrated, reducing the converter component count and
cost. The converters output sections, can be associated in order to derive three basic configurations, the
series, the parallel and the cascaded topologies. Applying the methodology for the flyback converter and
the standard DCDC single-ended converters, a family of integrated flyback converters is presented. All
the derived topologies presented the same ideal voltage gain, which is obtained from the sum of the
standard DCDC converter and the flyback voltage
gains. Aiming to further explore the characteristics
of such converters, the Integrated boost-flyback converters have been evaluated. Experimental results
obtained from laboratory prototypes proved the reliability of the integration methodology and also
pointed out the Series-IBF converter as the strongest
candidate for high voltage gain applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to express their gratitude
to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e TecnológicoCNPq (proc. 5541032010-9 and
proc. 4814322011-6) for financial support and Xilinx
for material support.
References
Aamir,
M.,
Shinwari,
M.Y.,
Design,
implementation and experimental analysis of
two-stage boost converter for grid connected
photovoltaic system, IEEE Int. Con. on Comp.
Sc. and Information Tech., 2010, p. 194-199.
Barreto, L.H.S.C., Praça, P.P., Henn, G.A.L., Silva,
R.N.A.L., Oliveira, D.S., Single Stage High
Voltage Gain Boost Converter With Voltage
Multiplier Cells for Battery Charging Using
Photovoltaic Panels, in 27th Annual IEEE
Applied Power Electronics Conference and
Exposition, 2012, p. 364-368.
Berkovich, Y. Berkovich, B. Axelrod, A. Shenkman,
A Novel Diode-capacitor Voltage Multiplier
for Increasing the Voltage of Photovoltaic
Cells, Workshop on Control and Modeling for
Power Electronics, 2008., p. 1-5.
Chen, Y.M., Lo, K.Y., and Chang, Y.R., MultiString Single-Stage Grid-Connected Inverter for

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

PV system, in 2011 IEEE Energy Conversion
Congress and Exposition (ECCE), p. 2751-2756.
Choi, B., Cho, B.H. and Lee, F.C., The stacked
power system A new power conditioning
architecture for mainframe computer systems,
in Proc. IEEE Power Electronics Specialists
Conf., Blacksburg, VA, June 1991, pp. 867-874.
Egelkraut, S., Frey, L., Rauch, M., Schletz, A. Marz,
M., Polymer Bonded Soft Magnetics for EMI
Filter Applications in Power Electronics, in 25th
Annual IEEE Applied Power Electronics
Conference and Exposition, 2010, p. 231-238.
Erickson, R.W. and Maksimovic, D.A., MultipleWinding Magnetics Model Having Directly
Measurable
Parameters.
IEEE
Power
Electronics Specialists Conference, Fukuoka,
pp.1472-1478, May 1998.
Goodwin, G. C., Mayne, D. Q., Chen, T., Coates, C.
Mirzaeva,
G.,
and
Quevedo,
D.E.,
Opportunities and Challenges in the
Application of Advanced Control to Power
Electronics and Drives, in IEEE International
Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT),
2010, p. 27-39.
Hopkins, D.C., Root, Jr., D.W. Synthesis of a New
Class of Converters That Utilize Energy
Recirculation, in 25th Annual IEEE Power
Electronics Specialists Conference PESC94,
1994, p. 1167-1172.
Jiang, Y. and Lee, F.C., Single-stage single-phase
parallel power factor correction scheme, in
Proc. IEEE Power Electronics Specialists Conf.,
June 1994, pp. 11451151.
Li, W., Zhao, Y., Wu, J., and He, X., Interleaved
High Step-Up Converter With Winding-CrossCoupled Inductors and Voltage Multiplier
Cells. IEEE Trans. on Power Electronics, Vol.
27, No. 1, Jan. 2012, p. 133-143.
Liu, K.-H., and Lee, F.C., Topological constraints
on basic PWM converters, IEEE Power
Electronics Specialists Conference, 1988, p.
164-172, Vol. 1.
Luo, F.L., Seven self-lift DC-DC converters,
voltage lift technique, IEE Proceedings on
Electric Power Applications, Vol. 148, No. 4,
July 2001, p. 329-338.
Morales-Saldana, J. A. Gutierrez, E. E. C. LeyvaRamos, J. Modeling of Switch-Mode DC-DC
Cascade Converters. IEEE Aerospace and
Electronic Systems, Janeiro 2002. 295 - 299.
Prudente, M., Pfitscher, L.L., Emmendoerfer, G.,
Romaneli, E.F., and Gules, R., Voltage
Multiplier Cells Applied to Non-Isolated DC
DC Converters. IEEE Trans. on Power
Electronics, Vol. 23, no. 2, March 2008, p. 871887.
Purwadi, A., Nugroho, K.A., Rizqiawan, A., and
Dahono, P.A., A new approach to synthesis of
static
power
converters,
International
Conference on Electrical Engineering and
Informatics, 2009. ICEEI 09, p. 627-633.

3677