XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

MODEL PREDICTIVE CONTROL OF A MODULAR MULTILEVEL CONVERTER WITH
SIMPLIFIED CAPACITOR VOLTAGE BALANCING
LAÍS F. CRISPINO, LUÍS G. B. ROLIM
Power Electronics Laboratory, Electrical Engineering Department, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
Caixa Postal 68504, 21941-972, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil
E-mails laiscrispino@coe.ufrj.br, rolim@ufrj.br
Abstract The operation and applications referred to the modular multilevel converter (MMC) have been a subject of increasing interest and research by the scientific community. However, the recently studied application areas for this converter topology
are mainly high voltage dc transmission (HVDC), with mediumhigh power. This paper proposes to use a model predictive control (MPC) as a control strategy to regulate the ac-side currents and circulating currents. Also a suboptimal algorithm which uses
a reduced number of considering states to implement the task of maintaining the submodules capacitor voltage balanced is proposed. The performance of this control strategy applied to a five-level MMC connected to the medium voltage distribution grid is
analysed based on simulation results conducted in the environment of circuit simulations PSIM.
Keywords MMC, Multilevel converters, Distributed Generation, MPC, Voltage Balancing.
Resumo O funcionamento e aplicações referentes ao conversor_multinível modular (CMM) vêm sendo, cada vez mais, objeto
de interesse e pesquisa por parte da comunidade científica. Entretanto, as aplicações estudadas para essa nova topologia de
conversor são, em sua maioria, sistemas_de_transmissão em corrente contínua de alta tensão (CCAT), de médiaalta potência. Este
trabalho propõe utilizar o modelo preditivo (MPC) como estratégia de controle para regular a corrente no lado CA, bem como as
correntes circulantes no CMM. Ainda, é proposto um algoritmo sub-ótimo, e que considera um número reduzido de estados, para
realizar a tarefa de balanceamento dos capacitores. A performance dessa estratégia de controle aplicada a um CMM de cinco
níveis de tensão fase-neutro conectado  rede de média tensão, é avaliada com base em simulações feitas no ambiente de
simulação de circuitos PSIM.
Palavras-chave .

1

Introduction

The Modular Multilevel Converter was first introduced in (Lesnicar, 2003), and since then it has
been a subject of great interest in power electronics
researches. This converter topology has been considered attractive in medium and high voltage applications since, as compared with the conventional two
or three-level converters, they provide high power
quality at the ac-side, higher output voltages with
extremely low distortion and reduction in the device
average switching frequency without compromise of
power quality, which allows operation with lower
switching frequency (Rodriguez, 2002) and (Kouro,
2010). All these features are possible due to its
scalability and modularity, which is also important
when it comes to maintenance, once it is easier to
replace individual submodules in case of failure, then
to replace the converter itself (Lesnicar, 2003).
Strategies to the current control in MMC are the
same applied to two-level voltage source converters
(VSCs), such as the decoupled dq reference frame
control (Guan, 2011), the pq theory (Akagi, 2007) or
using the model predictive control (MPC) (Cortés,
2008), which has been largely used recently due to
its fast dynamic response, possibility to include the
nonlinearities of the system and ease in digital implementation (Rodriguez, 2007), (Vargas, 2007),
(Kouro, 2009) and (Perez, 2012). Besides current
control, the MMC needs a proper voltage balancing
technique in order to keep the submodule capacitors
on their nominal voltage value. And also a circulating current control, to eliminate these current com-

ISSN 2525-8311

ponents generated from the voltage difference among
the three phase legs, and which contains negative
sequence components with the frequencies twice the
fundamental one (Debnath, 2015).
Reference (Qin, 2012) proposed a control strategy based on the MPC algorithm. The method used
there defined a cost function to control the ac-side
currents, circulating currents and also to implement
the capacitors voltage balancing task. However, it
switching states configuconsidered all possible
rations, given a number of n submodules per arm,
which would require higher computer effort as the
number n of submodules increases.
Reference (Moon, 2015) proposed a MPC method with a reduced number of considered states for acside current control, capacitor voltage balancing
control and circulating current control for a MMC.
The developed method used three MPCs with different cost functions to each control goal.
This paper also proposes a MPC control strategy
to regulate the ac-side currents and the circulating
currents based on (Moon, 2015). However, the algorithm to implement the submodules capacitor voltage
balancing task uses concepts of a sorting algorithm,
like the one presented by (Saeedifard, 2010), together
with the cost function idea used in MPC methods.
Still, the control proposed methods not only reduces
the required number of states in each cost function,
but also reduces the computational load presented in
common balancing tasks methods. Also, once MPC
will be used, a discrete-time model of the MMC will
be developed. At last, the simulation results will be
presented in order to verify the effectiveness of the

1566

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

proposed MPC strategy applied to the case study
system.
2 System Model and Control

2.2 MPC Strategy for the ac-side Currents
The MPC Strategy is based on the discrete-time
model of the system. Then it was used the Backward
Euler approximation in the system equations as follows

2.1 MMC Topology and Mathematical Model



A diagram of the system in analysis is shown in
Figure 1. The MMC consists of N  4 half-bridge
submodules per arm, resulting in a total of 24 submodules in the converter, and a reactance per arm
(l ). Each half-bridge submodule consists of two
IGBT switches with antiparallel diodes, and a capacitor. When the upper switch is turned on, the submodule capacitor voltage is applied to the terminals of the
submodule. Otherwise, when the current flows
through the lower switch, the voltage applied to the
terminals is equal to zero, and the submodule is considered turned off.

+

(

,

),

(6)

where T is the sampling period.
First, it is necessary to control the currents on
the ac-side according to their reference values. In
order to do that it is needed to predict the current
value in the following step, each step. Combining
(1), (2) and (3), it results in




+2

+2

+2

. (7)

Then, using (6), the predicted current can be calculated by
( +

( +

)  (0.5 

)

( +
where K 

( +
)+

) 

( )), (8)

+ R. v (t + T )

+ L and K 

is the estimated grid voltage and can be approximated by the measured value of v (t). Also, the term
0.5*(v (t + T )  v (t + T )) corresponds to the
predicted converter output voltage, v  (t + T ).
Then, as the goal is to regulate the predicted current
with respect to the reference one, then the first term
in the cost function is
( +


Figure 1. Distribution grid-connected MMC.

Based on Figure 1, the equations which govern
phase-a are








+

+

, (1)







, (2)





.

(3)

For phases b and c, the equations are identical.
Also, the currents in the upper and lower arms can be
calculated as follows



+
+

+
+

,

(4)
,

(5)

where
is the circulating current flowing through
phase-a. Again, the equations for phases b and c are
identical. These equations will be necessary to implement the MPC algorithm.

( +

) ,

(9)

where abs(*) is the absolute value function.
From (9), if it is considered all possible combinations of switching states to determine the value of
v (t + T ) in the cost function, the necessary number of combinations is C , according to (Qin, 2012).
In order to reduce this number, the approach based
on (Moon, 2015) considers the possible voltage output levels N+1 instead, which is inside the range










.

(10)

Therefore, from the regulation of the ac-side currents, it is determined the necessary output voltage
level, which can be expressed in terms of the lower
and upper arm voltage output references











+





(11)



(12)

0, 1, . . . , .

(13)

which are inside the range


ISSN 2525-8311

)

,





1567

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

This algorithm to control the ac-side currents is
summarized in the block diagram presented in Figure
2. But it is still necessary to control the circulating
currents and the submodules capacitor voltages.

converter output voltage v   , nor does it in the ac
current i . It only appears in the circulating component equation as shown bellow
( +

)

 (
(



( +



( +

)+

)+

) +

)+
( ). (17)

In this paper, only two voltage levels are allocated to V , and so this voltage component can assume
the values
1, 0, 1.



(18)

The cost function for the circulating current
components has the goal to minimize its components
values, and so can be defined as
( +



Figure 2. MMC-MPC ac-side currents control algorithm (N4).



This section presents the MPC algorithm used to
minimize the circulating currents, which is important
to reduce the submodules capacitor voltage ripples
and converter losses.
The ac-side currents control, shown in the previous section, calculated a reference signal for the
lower and upper arm output voltages. In the circulating current control method, these output voltage
references are modified in order to accomplish this
second goal of the overall control. Then, it is necessary to find an equation which relates the circulating
current and the arms output voltages for a given
phase-leg. First, (4) and (5) are added resulting in




.

(19)

Then the voltage references for the upper arm
and lower arm, considering the circulating current
control, are


2.3 MPC Strategy for the Circulating Currents

) .











( +
( +

)+
)+




(20)
(21)

which are inside the range




,







0, 1, . . , .

(22)

This algorithm to control the circulating current
components is summarized in the block diagram
presented in Figure 3.

(14)

Then, adding (1) and (2), and substituting (14),
the dynamic of a MMC arm circulating current in
terms of the arms output voltages is expressed as




.

(15)

Using the Euler approximation equation (6) in
(15), it is obtained the discrete equation need to control the circulating current component in each phase,
and already considering the reference voltages calculated previously
( +

)






( +

)

( +

) +

2.4 Submodule Capacitor Voltage Balancing
( ). (16)

However, according to (Moon, 2015), it is needed to add a voltage level V in each arm output voltage in order to control the circulating current components. This level addition does not interfere in the

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 3. MMC-MPC circulating currents control algorithm.

Similar to other multilevel converter topologies,
the MMC needs an active voltage balancing strategy
in order to maintain the submodule capacitor voltages regulated at their nominal value V N. The most
widely accepted voltage balancing strategy is based
on a sorting method (Debnath, 2015).

1568

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

To perform the voltage balancing task based on
a sorting method, it is necessary to measure all capacitors voltages, and sort them, and the upper and
lower arms currents. Then, if the upper (lower) arm
current is positive, a determined number of submodules Nu (Nl ) with the lowest voltages are inserted, and the submodules are charged. On the other
hand, if the upper (lower) arm current is negative, a
determined number of submodules Nu (Nl ) with
the highest voltages are inserted, and the submodules
are discharged. Regardless of the direction of the arm
current, if a submodule is bypassed, the corresponding capacitor voltage remains the same. Although the
sorting method guarantees a proper capacitor voltage
balancing, it produces unnecessary switching transitions and it is necessary to implement the sorting
algorithm for each leg every sampling period. Then,
as higher the number of submodules, higher is the
computing time to implement this task.
This paper proposes a balancing task which uses
both concepts of a sorting algorithm, but without
implementing the complete sorting every sampling
time, and a MPC control where a cost function is
used. However, it is proved that in the method proposed it is not necessary to predict the submodule
capacitor voltage to accomplish it.
To determine whether the submodule is onoff, it
is used the voltage references calculated previously
as shown as follows













 0, 1, . . , ,

(23)

 0, 1, . . , .

(24)

ble switching states. To avoid it and reduce the number of possible switching states to be considered,
only one submodule is selected at each loop and the
number of loops is determined by the value of
Nu , Nl . The cost function used to compare
them, based on the concepts of the sorting method
explained previously, is given by
 ( )(

( +

)

),

(26)

where the current is multiplied to determine whether
the submodule is charging or discharging, if its value
is positive or negative, respectively.
However, the algebraic difference between the
submodule capacitor voltage and its nominal value is
being used, instead of the absolute value. And to
always choose the minimum value of gc, (26) can be
simplified based on the inequalities
if  , then
if z  0 and if

+  + ,  ,
, then

.

(27)
(28)

And so, the new cost function is given by
 dec  ( )

( +

),

where dec  +-1, for Nu , Nl

0

(29)
0.

Then, instead of using the exact number of submodules to be turned onoff, it is used the variation
Nu and Nl in order to avoid unnecessary
switching transitions and computational time. Then,
0, the submodules whose switchif Nu , Nl
ing states are off are analyzed based on a cost function gc, that is presented as follows, and the minimum value is chosen. However, if Nu , Nl
0, the submodules whose switching states are on are
analyzed based on a cost function gc and the maximum value is chosen.
The cost function gc is usually based on the predicted values of the capacitor upper and lower voltages, which can be calculated based on the predicted
switched-onoff submodules, according to
( +

)

( )+

( )

,

(25)

where n is the number of the submodule per phase
and i(t) will be equal to i (t) or i (t) to the submodules in the upper arm or lower arm, respectively,
if the submodules are on. If the submodule is turned
off, then the term referred to the current in (25) is
equal to zero. And the cost function is usually given
by the absolute value of the sum of the submodules
predicted capacitor voltages. However, when using
this cost function it is necessary to consider all possi-

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 4. Submodule capacitor voltage balancing algorithm (N4).

Still, as the submodules to be turned on and off
are compared separately, the current term in equation
(25), used to compare the submodules to be turned
on, does not interfere in the comparison, as shown in
equation (27), and gc can be even more simplified to
 dec   ( )

( ),

(30)

proving that the predicted values of the capacitors
voltages are not necessary. Then, the number of
1569

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

computational operations is reduced, just as the
number of considered switching states. At last, the
capacitors voltage balancing method presented is
summarized in Figure 4.
2.5 Control of a grid-connected MMC
As mentioned in the Introduction section, there
are different methods presented in the literature to
calculate the reference currents used in the MPC
algorithm exposed previously. This paper proposes
the utilization of the pq theory (Akagi, 2007) together with the -frame.
According to the pq theory, the real and imaginary power can be calculated as follows



+


,
.

(31)
(32)

Then, the currents in -frame are calculated as


+

,

(33)





.

(34)

Table 1. System Parameters.
Parameter

MMC nominal power
Nominal frequency
Transformer (150 kVA)
Transformer leakage reactance
R
L
l
Submodule capacitor C
DC Source Voltage
Sampling period

Value

5 kVA
60 Hz
13.8 kV220 V
3.5
2
15 mH
5 mH
6mF
500 V
50 s

At t  0.2 s a power transfer command from dc
side to ac is activated and its reference value is p 
5 kW, in this case, imaginary power is kept q  0.
Then, at t  2.5 s the real power reference suffers a
step change to p  7 kW value, while q is again
maintained the same. At last, when simulation time
reaches t  3 s, imaginary power reference is step
changed to q  -4 kW, whereas real power reference is kept with p  7 kW value. Simulation results
for this routine are shown in Figure 6.

After calculating the reference currents, given a
specified p and q, it is then transformed these frame reference values to the abc-frame using matrix
K.
1
0










,

(35)

.

(36)



A complete scheme of this control is shown in
the block diagram of Figure 5.

Figure 5. Block diagram of the system control scheme.

3 Simulation Results
In this section the performance of the system in
analysis, shown in Figure 1 and whose parameters
are given in Table 1, is evaluated. Simulations were
conducted in the environment of circuit simulation
PSIM, and the results proving the MPC control capability of controlling the ac-side currents, circulating
current components and maintaining the submodules
capacitor voltages balanced are shown. The simulation routine starts in standby mode, which means that
real and imaginary power references are equal to
zero, and submodules capacitors are already charged
to their nominal values.

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 6. Simulation results (a) real and imaginary power
components of the grid-connected MMC (b) ac-side currents of
the MMC (c) submodules capacitor voltages of MMC phase-a
and (d) circulating current component of phase-a.

1570

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Figure 6(a) illustrates real and imaginary power
components and the control capability of regulating
them to their reference values. Figure 6(b) and (c)
show the ac-side currents of the MMC, controlled to
their reference values, and phasea submodule capacitor voltages of the MMC balanced to their nominal value. At last, Figure 6(d) shows the circulating
current component minimized.
When real time practical implementation is desired, problems related to the delay between signals
acquisition and the effective commutation of the
switches may occur due to the execution time of
control algorithms. In order to evaluate this matter,
simulations considering delays in switching command signals were implemented, and it was not observed instability problems for delays up to half of
the controllers sampling period. However, it requires that the execution time of control algorithms is
limited to intervals of that magnitude. To overcome
this limitation when the MMC has a high number of
submodules, it may be necessary to implement the
controllers in a hardware structure capable of parallelizing the execution, such as FPGA.
4 Conclusion
This paper proposes two MPC strategies, one to
control the ac-side currents components and other to
minimize the circulating current components. Also, it
proposes a capacitor voltage balancing algorithm
based on both sorting and MPC methods. The three
of them together have shown to be very efficient,
accomplishing the goals defined for each one. Besides, they need a reduced number of switching possibilities and less computational effort, which is
extremely important for real time experimental implementation.
References
Akagi, H., Watanabe, E., H. and Aredes, M. (2007).
Instantaneous power theory and applications to
power conditioning (Vol. 31). John Wiley and
Sons.
Cortes, P., Kazmierkowski, M., P., Kennel, R., M.,
Quevedo, D., E. and Rodriguez, J. (2008).
Predictive control in power electronics and
drives. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, Vol. 55, No. 12, pp. 4312-4324.
Debnath, S., Qin, J., Bahrani, B., Saeedifard, M. and
Barbosa, P. (2015). Operation, Control, and
Applications of the Modular Multilevel
Converter A Review. PowerTech Conference
Proceedings. IEEE Transactions on Power
Electronics, Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 37-53 Jan. 2015.

ISSN 2525-8311

Guan, M., Xu, Z., and Chen, H. (2011). Control and
modulation strategies for modular multilevel
converter based HVDC system. In IECON 201137th Annual Conference on IEEE Industrial
Electronics Society, pp. 849-854.
Kouro, S., Cortes, P., Vargas, R., Ammann, U. and
Rodriguez, J. (2009). Model predictive control a
simple and powerful method to control power
converters. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., Vol. 56,
No. 6, pp. 1826-1838.
Kouro, S., Malinowski, M., Gopakumar, K., Pou, J.,
Franquelo, L., G., Wu, B., Rodriguez, J., Perez,
M. and Leon, J., I. (2010). Recent advances and
industrial applications of multilevel converters.
IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., Vol. 57, No. 8, pp.
2553-2580.
Lesnicar, A. and Marquardt, R. (2003). An
innovative modular multilevel converter
topology suitable for a wide power range. (IEEE,
Ed.) PowerTech Conference Proceedings. IEEE
Bologna, Vol. 3, 23-26 June 2003.
Moon, J., Gwon, J., Park, J., Kang, D. and Kim, J.
(2015). Model Predictive Control With a
Reduced Number of Considered States in a
Modular Multilevel Converter for HVDC
System. IEEE Trans. On Power Delivery, Vol.
30, No. 2, pp. 608-617 April 2015.
Perez, M., A., Rodriguez, J., Fuentes, E. and
Kammerer, F. (2012). Predictive control of ac-ac
modular multilevel converters. IEEE Trans. Ind.
Electron., Vol. 59, No. 7, pp. 2832-2839.
Qin, J. and Saeedifard, M. (2012). Predictive control
of a three-phase dc-ac modular multilevel
converter. IEEE Energy Conversion Congress
and Exposition, pp. 3500-3505.
Rodriguez, J., Lai, J. and Peng, F., Z. (2002).
Multilevel inverters A survey of topologies,
controls, and applications. IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, Vol. 49, No. 4, pp. 724738.
Rodriguez, J., Pontt, J., Silva, C., A., Correa, P.,
Lezana, P., Cortes, P. and Ammann, U. (2007).
Predictive current control of a voltage source
inverter. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., Vol. 54,
No. 1, pp. 495-503.
Saeedifard, M. and Iravani, R. (2010). Dynamic
Performance of a Modular Multilevel Back-toBack HVDC System. IEEE Trans. On Power
Delivery, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 2903-2912 Oct.
2010.
Vargas, R., Cortes, P., Ammann, U., Rodrigues, J.
and Pontt, J. (2007). Predictive control of a
three-phase neutral-point-clamped inverter.
IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., Vol. 54, No. 5, pp.
2697-2705.

1571