XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

EXTREMUM SEEKING CONTROL FOR A CLASS OF NON HAMMERSTEIN-WIENNER
NONLINEAR PLANTS
A LESSANDRO JACOUD P EIXOTO, G UIDO J OSÉ VALENZANO T OCAIMASA, D IEGO P EREIRA -D IAS,
A LESSANDRO ROSA L OPES Z ACHI
 Universidade

Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ)
Departamento de Engenharia Eletrônica e de Computação (DELPoliUFRJ)
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil
 Centro

Federal de Educação Tecnológica Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFETRJ)
Programa de Pós-graduação em Engenharia Elétrica (PPEEL)
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil
 Universidade

Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ)
Laboratório de Ensaios Não Destrutivos, Corrosão e Soldagem (LNDC)
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil
Emails jacoud@poli.ufrj.br, guidovalenzano@ieee.org, diego.dias@lndc.com.br,
alessandro.zachi@cefet-rj.br
Abstract This work addresses an extension to the classical design of a perturbation-based extremum seeking control (ESC)
method applied to a class of non Hammerstein-Wienner (HW) plants. The original ESC scheme, when applied to a non HW
system, requires a very low perturbation frequency. This results in excessively larger settling times, rendering the ESC method
impractical for certain applications. This work addresses this problem by presenting two approaches for ESC applications a
gradient-reconstruction ESC (GR-ESC) and a pre-compensated ESC (PC-ESC). The first technique is used when some parameters
of the plant are known a priori or can be estimated by probing the system, while the second one allows to deal with uncertain higher
order plants. The proposed ESC techniques were validated considering a class of plants that captures the essential dynamic of the
Eikrems model for gas lifted oil wells. The ESC techniques applied in this context, indicate that it is possible to maintain the oil
production around the optimum point of the well-performance curve (WPC) in gas lifted oil wells without reducing the frequency
of the perturbation to forbidden practical values. The closed loop control performance is evaluated via numerical simulations.
Keywords Extremum seeking control, non-Hammerstein-Wiener models, oil production, gas lifted wells.
Resumo Este trabalho apresenta uma extensão do projeto clássico de controle baseado no método de busca_extremal (ESC)
a uma classe de plantas do tipo não Hammerstein-Wiener (HW). A formulação original do ESC quando aplicado a um sistema
não HW requer uma forte redução na frequência de perturbação na qual pode tornar o ESC impraticável. Duas abordagens para
aplicação do ESC são apresentadas uma baseada diretamente na reconstrução do gradiente (GR-ESC) e uma que utiliza uma précompensação para reduzir o sistema para o tipo HW (PC-ESC). A primeira técnica é usada quando alguns parâmetros da planta
são conhecidos a priori ou podem ser estimados, enquanto que o segundo método permite lidar com plantas incertas e de ordem
superior. Baseado em resultados anteriores, a classe de plantas considerada captura a dinâmica essencial do modelo de Eikrem
para um poço de petróleo que utiliza o método de elevação_artificial. Neste sentido, este trabalho aborda a aplicação do ESC para
a otimização da produção_de_petróleo. A técnica de ESC aplicada neste contexto mostra que é possível manter a produção de
petróleo em torno de um ponto ótimo da curva de performance de poço de petróleo com elevação_artificial sem reduzir a frequência
da perturbação para valores impraticáveis. O desempenho da malha_fechada de controle é avaliada por simulação numérica.
Palavras-chave .

1

Introduction

Extremum-seeking control (ESC) is an alternative approach for online optimization that deals with uncertain when the plant model andor the cost function to
optimize are not available to the designer. Using only
input-output signals, the goal is to design a controller
that dynamically searches for the optimizing inputs.
This paper considers the applicability of ESC to face
the optimization problem of oil production in gas lifted oil wells.
The modified version of Eikrems model by 8
for gas lifted oil wells was evaluated via numerical simulations in 7 where no phase difference was
observed between the input and output of the wellperformance curve (WPC) mapping, when a high frequency periodic perturbation was used. An analogous

ISSN 2525-8311

simulation was performed with a very low perturbation frequency, yielding to a clearer phase difference
at the expense of larger settling time (with duration of
several years). This impairs the direct applicability of
the ESC method. Seeking to circumvent this problem,
in 7, the modified Eikrems model is analyzed and a
suitable model is proposed as a surrogate for the Eikrems model a simple stable first order linear system
followed by a nonlinearity containing a product of the
plant input and state. This model encompass a class
of non Hammerstein-Wienner (HW) plants and, since
the plant output is formed by a product of the plant input and the output of the nonlinearity, then a non-HW
plant results. This model allows to capture the main
features of the Eikrem model 2 and clarify the main
reason for the difficult to detect the phase difference
between input-output 7.

122

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

In 1, the perturbation-based ESC method was
generalized for a class of dynamic plants stabilizable
via state feedback. The general idea was to generate
a closed-loop system with sufficiently fast dynamics
in order to behave approximately as a static plant. A
more general class of nonlinear plants were treated in
6 by assuming again that the system (in closed loop
via state feedback) can behave approximately as a static one or by assuming that the period of the periodic
perturbation is large when compared to the time constant of the system (low excitation frequency). For the
class of HW systems, compensators can be added to
the ESC scheme so that the period of the periodic perturbation can be reduced, leading to faster transients
to reach the vicinity of the maximizer 1, 5.
It must be highlighted that, in all cases 6, 1
and 5, the ESC method is deeply dependent on a
good phase difference detection between input and
output for average values of the input below and above
the maximizer. A clear phase difference appears only
for very low frequencies of the periodic perturbation,
which impairs the directly applicability of the ESC
method.
This paper focus on the non-HW model described in 7. Two methods are proposed that allow the
use of perturbation-based ESC via output feedback
for the class of uncertain nonlinear_systems considered here, without reducing the frequency of operation.
Two approaches for ESC application are presented
a gradient-reconstruction ESC (GR-ESC) and a precompensated ESC (PC-ESC). The pre-compensation
is proposed in order to approximate the nonlinear system to a HW system, allowing to reduce the period of
the periodic perturbation. As a result, the optimization
of oil production via ESC for practical perturbation
frequencies is shown possible by using the proposed
techniques.
Remark 1 (Notation and Terminology) The symbol
s represents either the Laplace variable or the differential operator ddt, according to the context. As
in 3, H(s)u denotes the output of a LTI system with
transfer function H(s) and input u. Pure convolutions
h(t)  u(t), with h(t) being the impulse response from
H(s), will be eventually written as H(s)  u. Classes
of K , K , L functions are defined according to 4,
p. 144, in particular, a function   IR+  IR+ belongs to class L if it is continuous, strictly decreasing
and limt  (t)  0. A function   IR+  IR+ belongs to class K if it is continuous, strictly increasing
and (0)  0.
2

Problem Statement

Consider the following class of nonlinear uncertain
SISO plants
x  G(s)u ,
y  h(x, u)   (x)u .

ISSN 2525-8311

(1)
(2)

where G(s) is general strictly stable transfer function, u  IR is the control signal, x  IR is the linear
plant output (not available), y  IR is measured output, and   IR  IR is a class L (  L ) function. Let G0  G(0) 6 0 be the finite DC gain and
G1  G( j) be the frequency response gain evaluated at the ESC operating frequency . In order to
assure existence and forward uniqueness of solutions,
it is assumed that the nonlinear function  is sufficiently smooth in x (all required derivatives are continuous). For each solution of the nonlinear system (1)
and (2) there exists a maximal time interval of definition given by 0,tM ), where tM may be finite or infinite1 . It is clear that the control law u  u assures that
x  G0 u is an equilibrium point globally exponential
stable, where u  IR is a parameter. The corresponding plant output is given y  (G0 u )G0 , where
  IR  IR is the static input-output mapping
( )   ( ) ,

  IR .

(3)

Of course, for G(s)  1, we have a static input-output
mapping given by y  (u). Note that, due to the presence of the control signal u in (2), the system does not
belong to the class of HW type systems2 , which is the
most important class of nonlinear_systems covered by
ESC schemes founded in the literature, in particular,
the perturbation-based ESC schemes 1.
Here, we address the global real-time optimization control problem  problem of extremum seeking
 considering only the maximum seeking problem,
without loss of generality. We deal with the maximization of the plant output (2) subjected to (1). We assume
that the static mapping   IR  IR (3) has a unique
maximizer    IR such that (  ) is the maximum,
i.e.,   IR one has ( )  (  ). Moreover, we
consider that   , () and its gradient are unknown
for the control designer and that all the uncertain parameters belong to some compact set. It must be highlighted that this simple linear model approximates the
Eikhers model for oil wells according to 7.
2.1

Preliminaries

Consider the perturbation-based extremum seeking
control method described in 6. A brief description
is given in Appendix A. For plants with G(s)  1 in
(1), or with sufficiently fast dynamics when compared with the period of the disturbance, the following
input-output static relationship results y  (u).
In the ESC method the control signal is composed
by an estimated  for maximizer   added to a sinusoidal perturbation v  asin(t), i.e., u   + v. The
estimate  is given by
k
   ,
a

 (0)  0 ,

(4)

1 Note

that the control signal u is a function of the plant output,
so that the closed loop system is a nonlinear system even when (1)
is a linear plant.
2 Note that, however, by adding a stable filter at the system input
results in a augmented HW system.

123

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

where k > 0 is a design constant and  is an estimate
for the gradient of the function  in (3) evaluated at
0
0
 , i.e.,  ( ). Note that, when    ( ) the resul0
ting dynamics   ak  ( ) has an asymptotically stable equilibrium point given by the maximizer     .
Now, for plants with G(s) 6 1 in (1), the period of
the periodic disturbance is limited from below due to
the dynamics in (1). There exists a difficult to detect
the phase difference between input-output and a simple linear compensation, as the one approached in 
where HW plants were considered, is preclude due to
the product of state and input presented in the output
function (2). In fact, the direct application of the ESC
to this class of non-HW plants is not feasible when the
ESC frequency increases.
The ESC is based on time scaling separation so
that we assume that the signal  is in the passband of
the transfer function G(s), according to the following
assumption
(H0) The estimate  (t) is such that the signal
G(s)   (t)  G0  (t)  (t) ,
converges exponentially to a residual set of order
O(  ), i.e., (t)  O(  ), as t  , where  
is a sufficiently small constant.
It is clear that when the estimate  (t) varies slowly
with respect to the input frequency , one can consider that G(s)   (t)  G0  (t).
3

Non-HW Plants Gradient Reconstruction
ESC

The original ESC, when applied to a non HW system,
requires a strong reduction of the perturbation frequency which can make the ESC be impractical. The
proposed Gradient-Reconstruction ESC (GR-ESC) is
employed when some parameters of the plant are
known a priori or can be estimated by probing the system.
By considering (H0) and u(t)   (t) + a sin(t),
one can write
x  z + aG1 sin(t +  ) + 1 ,

z   G0 + (t) , (5)

where (t) comes from (H0), 1 is an exponentially
decaying term depending on the plant (1) initial conditions and on the transient response due to the sinusoidal input term and   G( j) is the phase-shift
introduced by G(s) in (1). By applying the product
rule to (z)   (z)z, one can write
0

0

 (z)   (z) +  (z)z ,

(6)

where, the signal z(t) is not available for feedback.
Similarly to the case where G(s)  1, in what follows, an estimate  for the gradient is obtained. The
main difference is that the gradient is now evaluated at
z, where z(t)  G0  (t), as t  , according to (H0).
0
Note that, when    (G0  ) the resulting dyna0
mics G0   ak  (G0  ) has an asymptotically stable
equilibrium point given by the maximizer     G0 .

ISSN 2525-8311

3.1

Gradient Reconstruction

Since the output y is measured then  (x) can be obtained as  (x)  uy , (u 6 0), and satisfies  (x) 
0
 (z) +  (z) aG1 sin(t +  ) + 1  + H.O.T , where
0
H.O.T. denotes high order terms and  (z)  ddz(z) .
Thus, since 1 decays exponentially to zero, there
exists T1 > 0 such that 1 (t) < a, t  T1 . Hence, by
considering the first-order Taylor series approximation
around z, one can write
0

 (x)   (z) +  (z)aG1 sin(t +  ) ,

t  T1 . (7)

Let the amplitude of the sine wave be denoted by AC
while the bias be denoted by DC, i.e.,
0

AC   (z)aG1 ,

DC   (z) .

(8)

Then, the gradient evaluated at z is given by
0

0

 (z)   (z) +  (z)z  DC +

AC
g +  ,
a

(9)

AC
0
 and g  G
where   aG
G1 .
1
The DC component  (z) can be estimated as the
output of a low-pass filter driven by the available signal  (x(t)), t  T1 . Analogously, the sinusoidal component  0 (z) aG1 sin(t +  ) can be retrieved using a
band-pass filter centered at . Higher order terms may
be obtained in a similar manner, but are neglected in
this analysis since for a < 1, it becomes inherently
smaller as the power of a raises. From (8), the estic for the signal DC   (z) is defined as
mate DC

c 
 (z)  DC

1
 (x) ,
dc s + 1

(10)

where dc > 0 is a constant designed to filtered the
oscillatory component appearing in the approximation
of the available signal  (x)  yu (u 6 0). Estimating
the amplitude of a sinusoidal signal is a well-known
problem in engineering, and several solutions are available using continuous-time and discrete-time approaches. In particular, the signal AC, given in (8), can be
estimated by
2
sin(t)(t) ,
ac s + 1

s
 (x) ,
s + wac
(11)
where ac is a positive design constant and  is the
output of a high-pass filter, with wac being a positive
design constant.
Therefore, inspired in (9), the following estimate
0
for the gradient  (z) in (6) is considered
c
AC



c
0
c + AC g ,
 (z)    DC
a

(12)

where g is an estimate for the gain g  G0 G1 given
in what follows. In fact, (12) with g  g is one possible estimate for the gradient when g is a known gain.
Moreover, it is clear that this estimate approximates
c  AC, DC
c  DC, g  g and
the gradient as long as AC
  0.

124

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

3.2

Estimating the Gain g First Approach

By applying a constant value  , i.e.  (t)   , one
has that z  G0  + , with   0 being an exponential
decaying term. Let zs   G0 . Thus, one can write
x   G0 +aG1 sin(t +  ) + 2 ,
z

(13)

with kr , 0 being constants.
In this case, one has that z  G0  + , with  
r + r , where r is a constant and r is an exponential
decaying term corresponding to the transient response
due to the ramp input term. Let zr   G0 + r . Thus,
the output x can be written as

zs

where 2  1 +  incorporates the exponential decaying term . Moreover, one has  (x)   (zs ) +
0
 (zs )aG1 sin(t +  ), t  T2 , where T2 is such that
2 (t) < a, t  T2 . In this case, redefine the amplitude of the sine wave and the bias term by
0

AC   (zs )aG1 ,

DC   (zs ) .

(14)

x   G0 + r +aG1 sin(t +  ) + 3 ,
 z 

where 3  1 +r is an exponentially vanishing term.
Similarly as in the first approach, one has  (x) 
0
 (zr ) +  (zr )aG1 sin(t +  ), t  T5 , where T5 is
such that 3 (t) < a, t  T5 . In this case, redefine
the amplitude of the sine wave and the bias term by

In order to estimate the gain g, consider the following procedure
1. Apply a constant signal  (t)  1 and u  1 +
a sin(t). Let T3 be sufficiently large to assure
that the vanishing exponential term 2 can be neglected for t  T3 .
2. Apply a constant signal  (t)  2  1 +  and
u  2 + a sin(t), with  being an arbitrarily
small design constant. Let T4 be sufficiently large
to assure that the vanishing exponential term 2
can be neglected for t  T4 .

0

AC   (zr )aG1 ,

1 2

 (G0 2 )   (G0 1 )
,
G0 (2  1 )

0

(15)

0

an estimate  (G0 1 ) for  (G0 1 ) can be defined as
0

0

 (G0 1 )   (G0 1 ) 

c 2  DC
c1
DC
,
G0 

(16)

c 1 (DC
c 2 ) is
when G0 is a known constant, where DC
the estimate for DC1   (G0 1 ) (DC2   (G0 2 ))
obtained as in (10).
In addition, from (14) one can define AC1 
0
 (G0 1 )aG1 . Therefore, from (16) one can define an
estimate g for the unknown gain g as
c 2  DC
c 1)
a (DC
g 
,
c1

AC
c 1 is the corresponding estimate of AC1 , as in
where AC
(11). This procedure is feasible because g is a constant
gain, regardless the value of  . It must be stressed
that the finite difference method (16) can fail due to
measurement noise, so an alternative approach based
on a filtered version (dirty derivative) is considered
in what follows.
3.3

Estimating the Gain g Second Approach

Now set u(t)   (t) + a sin(t) with  being the type
ramp function given by
  kr ,

ISSN 2525-8311

 (0)  0 ,

(18)

0

 
one has that

AC
DC

d dzr
 (zr )
d


zr ,
dt
dzr dt
 (zr )
aG1 
aG1 
zr  G  , since zr
0
0
G
G1 can be expressed



Hence, the gain g

g

0

DC   (zr ) .

In addition, consider the auxiliary unavailable signal
  ln  (zr ), with time derivative given by

Recalling that
 (G0 1 )  lim

(17)

zr

DC a
.
AC 

(19)

  G0 + r .
as
(20)

In what follows an estimate for the gain g is dec for the signal DC and
veloped. First, the estimates DC
c for the signal AC are given as in the first approach.
AC
By noting that the unavailable signal
h  i ln  (zr ) 
c then the time
ln DC can be estimated by   ln DC
b  s ,
derivative  can be approximated by 
 s+1

where  > 0 is an appropriate design constant. The
estimate g for the gain g in (20) is given by
g 

b
c a
DC
,
c kr
AC

(21)

since   kr .
4

Non-HW Plants Pre-Compensated ESC

The main idea is to reduce the system to a HW system
which has the same input-output static mapping and
for which the ESC frequency can be increased.
Here we use the following available auxiliary output signal
y
Y  X , u 6 0 ,
u
to generate the estimate  for the gradient, by applying
the traditional ESC to the resulting plant
x  G(s)u ,
Y   (x)X .

(22)
(23)

125

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

One Possible Choice for the Signal X
Considering (H0), the signal x in (5) can be approximate by


(24)
x   + ga sin(t +  ) G0 ,
modulo exponential decaying terms. Based on this approximation, the pre-compensation signal X is defined as


X   + ga sin(t +  ) .
(25)
where g can be obtained from (21). We can estimate
the phase shift   G( j) by  using a phase lock
loop estimator (PLL) applied to the available signal
yu   (x), when u 6 0. Indeed, since   L the
signal  (x) has, approximately, the same phase shift
(G( j)) as x w.r.t. to the input u (in steady state).
Proposed Pre-Compensation
The initialization procedure is given by
1. Apply a constant signal  (t)   . Let T6 be sufficiently large to assure that the vanishing exponential terms can be neglected for t  T6 and the
PLL reaches the steady state.
2. Apply a ramp type signal  (t) satisfying   k ,
with  (0)  0 . Let T7 be sufficiently large to
assure that the vanishing exponential terms can
be neglected for t  T7 and the gain estimator (21)
is in steady state.
The signal x in (24) can be approximated by
x  G0 X ,

t  T8 ,

(26)

where T8 > maxT6 , T7 .
Note that, by applying the compensation signal X  xG0 , the system (22)(23) with precompensation has the input-output static mapping
(x)G0   (x)xG0 from u to Y  (yu)X and
now (t > T8 ) behaves as an HW system. The uncertain parameter G0 is irrelevant since the ESC gain k
can be adjusted to guarantee the transient behavior
of the closed loop control system. The time instants
T6 , T7 and T8 are unknown, however, a rough estimate
can be obtained a priori observing the available signal yu   (x). Moreover, the transition between applying a constant value and a ramp function can be accomplished on-line by starting with a very small ESC
gain k and increasing it smoothly.

ISSN 2525-8311

5

Numerical Simulations

Consider the plant (1)(2), with G(s)  1(s + 1),
time constant   1250 and nonlinear output such that
P(x)
, with P(x)  0.3x4  7.8x3 + 83.2x2 
 (x)  Q(x)
475.2x + 1851.5 and Q(x)  1.3x4 + 34.3x3 
373.8x2 + 3009.6x + 3033.3. The corresponding cost
function (x)   (x)x has a maximizer at x  x 
5.31. The perturbation parameters of the ESC scheme
are a  0.1 and   0.0031. The pre-compensation
ESC is implemented with the PLL and integral gain
k  0.1. The others ESC parameters appearing in Appendix A are the high-pass cut-off frequency h 
4 and the low-pass cut-off frequency L  11 
4. On the other hand, the ESC based on direct
gradient estimation is implemented with integral gain
k  8.3333  105 , a third-order low-pass Butterworth
filter with cut-off frequency L  2 and a thirdorder band-pass Butterworth filter with cut-off frequencies PL  2 and PH  1.075. Additionally, an initial characterization of G1  0.2474 was
made with 1  3 and 2  1 + 1  105 .
The output of both ESC schemes are shown in
Fig. 1. It can be seen straightforwardly that both ESC
schemes converge asymptotically to a vicinity of the
maximizer. On the one hand, it would seem that the
ESC based on direct gradient estimation converges to
the maximizer, while the pre-compensated ESC presents steady state error. The pre-compensated ESC is
deeply dependent on the accuracy of the estimates g
and  , revealing a high sensitivity. On the other hand,
the pre-compensated ESC has a greater integral gain,
which allows a faster convergence.
6.5

6

5.5

Control output kgs

Note that, by choosing X such that X  x, the system
(22)(23) has an input-output static mapping with the
same maximizer as the original system (1)(2). The
advantage is that now (22)(23) is (approximately) a
HW system. This class of plants has been extensively addressed in the ESC literature. Recalling that
a clear phase difference between input-output appears
only for very low frequencies of the periodic perturbation when the non-HW plant is considered, now it is
possible to detect phase difference between Y and u
for higher ESC operating frequencies.

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

0

2

4

6

8

10
Time s

12

14

16

18
5

x 10

Figure 1 Simulation of the proposed ESC schemes. The
signal  time behavior by using the pre-compensation ESC
(red line), the ESC based on direct gradient estimation (blue
line) and the true maximizer value (dashed line).

Now, consider the second order linear plant
1
, with the same nonlinearity as
G(s)  (0.25s+1)(0.1s+1)
before. The pre-compensated ESC performance is satisfactory by using the parameters a  0.01, h  2,
  2 and k  5. The results are illustrated in Figure 2.

126

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro
50

zation by extremum seeking control. Wiley Interscience,
2003.

45

2 E IKREM , G. O. Stabilization of gas-lift wells by feedback control. PhD thesis, Department of Engineering
Cybernetics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway, May 2006.

40

Control output degrees

35

30

25

3 I OANNOU , P., AND S UN , K. Robust Adaptive Control.
Prentice Hall, 1996.

20

4 K HALIL , H. K. Nonlinear Systems. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2002.

15

10

5

0

0

100

200

300

400

500
Time s

600

700

800

900

1000

Figure 2 Numerical simulations for second order plant.
Time history of the variable  (ESC output) with the maximizer z  30. The estimate  switching from a rough
initial value to the PLL estimate, after t  500 s.

The application faster sinusoids was only possible because the system was rebuilt as HW model, see
Figure 2, where the estimate  varies from a rough initial value to the PLL estimate. Further research may
be carried on by combining the strengths of both ESC
schemes, encouraging to develop a hybrid method.
6

5 K RSTÍC , M. Performance improvement and limitations
in extremum seeking control. Systems  Control Letters
39 (2000), 313326.
6 K RSTI C , M., AND WANG , H.-H. Stability of extremum seeking feedback for general nonlinear dynamic
systems. Automatica 36, 7 (April 2000), 595601.
7 P EIXOTO , A. J., P EREIRA -D IAS , D., X AUD , A. F.,
AND S ECCHI , A. R. Modelling and extremum seeking
control of gas lifted oil wells. IFAC-PapersOnLine 48,
6 (2015), 21  26. 2nd IFAC Workshop on Automatic
Control in Offshore Oil and Gas Production OOGP
2015Florianópolis, Brazil, 2729 May 2015.
8 R IBEIRO , C. Controle preditivo multivariável com requisitos de qualidade em plataformas de produção de
petróleo. Masters thesis, COPPE, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Sept. 2012.

Conclusion
A

In this work two schemes for output-feedback
extremum-seeking control (ESC) based on periodic
perturbation were developed for a class of uncertain
non Hammerstein-Wienner (HW) plants. When certain parameters of the plant are known a priori or
can be estimated by probing the system, the gradientreconstruction extremum-seeking control (GR-ESC)
has proven to be effective in estimating the maximizer.
The GR-ESC features a low-pass filter, a band-pass filter and an amplitude detector that allows to reconstruct
the gradient of the output, thus detecting the optimal
point. For more general plants with a higher order uncertain dynamics, the pre-compensation (PC-ESC) has
shown a fast-response convergence to the maximizer.
The PC-ESC approximates the system to an HW plant
by using an estimate provided by a phase-locked_loop
(PLL).
The performance of the two ESC approaches were
evaluated via numerical simulations. The behavior of
a gas-lifted oil well was modeled using a simple nonlinear dynamic model which captures the essential dynamic of a modified version of the Eikrems model, in
both transient and steady state regimes. Based on this
model, the closed-loop simulations generated a more
accurate estimation of the maximizer of the plant when
using the GR-ESC, whereas the use of PC-ESC presented a faster convergence despite the sensitivity to
the PLL estimates.
Referências
1 A RIYUR , K. B., AND K RSTIC , M. Real time optimi-

ISSN 2525-8311

ESC for Static Plants

By using the first two terms of the Taylor series to approximate the input-output relationship (u) with u   +
0
asin(t), it follows that y  ( ) +  ( )asin(t). In
general, the output y can be consider to present the form
yss (t)  1 (t) sin(t) + 2 (t) in steady state3 . Therefore,
1 and 2 can be estimated as follows. The amplitude 1
2
can be estimated by 1  1 s+1
sin(t)(t), where 1 is
a positive design constant and  is the output of a highwh
s
y  y  s+w
y. Indeed, the filter
pass filter, i.e.,   s+w
h
h
wh
,
designed
properly,
attenuate
the
term
1 (t) sin(t) in
s+wh
y  1 (t) sin(t) + 2 (t). Then,   1 (t) sin(t). The signal is then demodulated, multiplying by sin(t), resulting in
1 (t) sin2 (t). Reminding that 2 sin2 (t)  1  cos(2t),
2
only the DC component is not filtered by 1 s+1
. Hence,
1  1 . The average value (DC component) is estimated
1
y, where 2 is a positive design consdirectly by 2  2 s+1
0

tant. Note that, 2  2 . Thus, 1   ( )a, 2  ( ) and
an approximation for the gradient of the function  evaluated at  is given by   1 a. For the correct operation
of the algorithm the cutoff frequencies wh and 1 must be
less than . The amplitude a of the sinusoidal perturbation defines the size of the oscillations around the optimal
point, while the integrator gain k defines how fast the output
will reach this neighborhood. These two constants should be
small enough to assure the stability of the algorithm 6.

3 Note that, even for the case G(s) 6 1, the dynamic_system is
stable and it still reasonable to consider that the output y presents
this form in steady state.

127