Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

CONTROLLING A INSPECTION ROV USING LOW COST SENSORS
Vinicius Kuhn, Paulo Drews Jr., Sebastiao Gomes




Instituto Federal Sul-Rio-Grandense (IFSUL)
Charqueadas, RS, Brazil

Universidade Federal do Rio Grande (FURG)
Rio Grande, RS, Brazil

Emails vinicius@charqueadas.ifsul.edu.br, paulodrews@furg.br, sebastiaogomes@furg.br
Abstract This work deals with the implementation of a depth and orientation automatic control of an
underwater vehicle to perform inspection tasks of submerged structures without using the knowledge of a previous
dynamic model in the control law and, mainly, by using a low cost embedded minimal instrumentation. This
instrumentation does not employ expensive components to determine the depth and orientation of the vehicle,
like a central inertial. Experimental results using the proposed sensing show that the closed loop control of the
vehicle was suitable for the assist human operator in inspection tasks.
Keywords

Underwater Vehicle, Robot control, Gyroscopes, ROV, Low-cost.

Resumo O presente trabalho lida com a implementacao de um controle_automatico de profundidade e
orientacao de um veculo_subaquatico para efetuar tarefas de inspecao de estruturas submersas sem usar nenhum
conhecimento previo do modelo_dinamico na lei de controle, e principalmente, utilizando instrumentacao mnima
de baixo_custo. Essa instrumentacao nao emprega componentes caros para determinar profundidade e orientacao
do veculo, como uma central inercial. Resultados experimentais usando o sistema proposto mostram que o
controle em malha_fechada do veiculo e adequado para auxiliar um operador humano em tarefas de inspecao.
Palavras-chave

.

Introduction

Nowadays, the ocean plays a fundamental role in
the global economy, mainly due to oil extraction
industry. Nevertheless, much of the underwater
environment is still unknown to the man, either
by size or by adverse environmental conditions.
In these situations, unmanned underwater vehicles become an important tool because they allow, without risking human lives, to perform inspections, collect data, perform construction work
and installation of underwater structures, etc.
The inspection of underwater installations,
such as power cables, telecommunications, and
pipelines, is performed by trained professionals
who, from the surface, controls a ROV (Remotely
Operated Vehicle) based on images captured by
an embedded video camera. This is a hard, slow,
tiring, and error-prone task because it requires
experience and constant operator attention to a
console in order to maneuver the vehicle. Moreover, the task complexity is increased by the ocean
currents action and by lack of underwater images
quality. Therefore, the automation of any part of
this process can constitute an important improvement with respect to errors, working time, and
cost.
However, designing control laws for unmanned underwater vehicles is a hard task, mainly
due to difficulties in determining a realistic dynamic model. The existence of external disturbances, such as forces exerted by the umbilical cable and the ocean currents action, also add extra
difficulties to the control system performance. Un-

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

derwater vehicles are also characterized by having
a difficult instrumentation, i.e., accurately determine the pose of the vehicle from inertial sensors
is a complicated task and can be very expensive.
Several researches on underwater vehicles can
be found in the literature. Designs and development of low-cost underwater vehicles are
treated in (Moraes, 2005 Centeno, 2007 Calvo
et al., 2009 Cadena, 2011). Research on dynamic modeling and simulations of underwater vehicles control can be found in (Tavares, 2003 Kucuk, 2007 Wang et al., 2009 Wang et al., 2011).
Many types of controllers have been exploited
to control these vehicles, such as controllers based
on neural networks (Li and Lee, 2005 Bagheri
et al., 2006 Shi et al., 2006 Liang et al., 2010),
sliding-mode (Guo et al., 2003 Sebastian, 2006
Akcakaya et al., 2009 Narimani et al., 2009), fuzzy
controllers (Nagashima et al., 2002 Akkizidis
et al., 2003 Aguilar, 2007 Salim et al., 2010),
sensorial fusion (Williams et al., 2001 Karras
et al., 2011), multivariable systems (Luque, 2007),
variable structure (Gomes, 2011), etc.
This work demonstrates the feasibility of
depth and orientation automatic control of an
ROV in order to auxiliary an human operator to
supervise and inspect a submerged structure using a low cost embedded minimal instrumentation,
and without using the knowledge of a previous dynamic model in the control law.

2321

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

2

2.1

Description of the Experimental
Apparatus

Underwater Vehicle

The vehicle used in this work is presented in
Fig. 1. This is the ROVFURG-II, developed at
FURG (Federal University of Rio Grande). Detailed information about the design, development
and construction of this vehicle can be found in
(Moraes, 2005 Centeno, 2007 Kuhn, 2011).
(a) Frontal

(b) Top

(c) Side

(d) Perspective

Figure 2 Different Views from ROVFURG-II generated using CAD Software.

Figure 1 Underwater vehicle used in this work
ROVFURG-II.
This vehicle has four thrusters, two arranged
horizontally and two vertically, as shown in Fig. 2,
where are shown the orthogonal and perspective
simplified views. The ROVFURG-II is a prototype of an underwater vehicle type ROV, it was
designed to perform only inspection tasks in the
underwater environment, in such a way that it
does not have any type of manipulator to perform work. The ROVFURG-II has slightly positive buoyancy, near neutral, so that small vertical thrust applied by the thrusters tends to easily
move the prototype. In cases of problem with the
vehicle, slightly positive buoyancy causes it rises
slowly to the surface.
Another important feature of this vehicle
is with respect to its controllability.
The
ROVFURG-II is sub-actuated, i.e., it has an insufficient number of actuators to make the active control in its six degrees of freedom (does
not have side thrusters that allow a lateral displacement of the vehicle, sway motion). Moreover, the pitch and roll motions are controlled
passively from the distance between the centers of
thrust and gravity, which creates the restorative
torques to keep the vehicle in a horizontal position (Tavares, 2003). Thus, the two top thrusters
only control the heave motion, while the two horizontal thrusters are responsible for surge and yaw
motions. The thrusters used in ROVFURG-II
are manufactured by SeaBotix, model BTD 150

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

(Seabotix Inc., 2007), the response curve could be
found in (Centeno, 2007). It has other sensors as
an ultrasonic altimeter model PA200 and a underwater color video camera model Typhoon, both
are manufactured by Tritech Inc. It is possible to
see the camera in Fig. 1.
In order to achieve control tasks, some sensor
are available in the vehicle. They are presented in
the next sections.
2.2

Depth Sensor

A depth sensor was incorporated into ROVFURGII to achieve the heave motion automatic control. It is an integrated pressure sensor, which
provides an indirect measure of depth from the
hydrostatic pressure exerted by the water column
on the sensitive element. The integrated pressure
sensor used is the MPX4250DP (Freescale Semiconductors, 2011).
For the purpose of sensor calibration, tests
were conducted to obtain its response curve, as
described in (Kuhn, 2011). The experiment was
repeated three times and its results, together with
the ideal response supplied by the manufacturer
(linear response), are presented in Fig. 3.
Based on these results, one can verify that the
experimental results vary slightly around the ideal
response. These errors may be associated with
factors such as inaccuracy in measuring the water column height, compression of the air pocket
formed between the sensor and liquid media, errors in analog to digital conversion, errors inherent
to the sensor itself, etc. Nevertheless, as the experimental curves were close to the ideal curve,

2322

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

the sensor response was considered linear.

one minute of integration, the greater positioning error in three repetitions of this experiment
was of 3.450 , which is acceptable for inspection
purposes, but must be taken into consideration in
other types of application.

Figure 3 Response curve of pressure sensor.

2.3

Rotation Sensor

To achieve the yaw motion automatic control, a
second sensor was incorporated into ROVFURGII. This is a gyroscope MEMS (Micro ElectroMechanical System) rotation sensor, which is responsible for measuring the angular rate around
the vertical axis of the vehicle. The gyroscope
used is the ADXRS610 (Analog Devices, 2011).
This gyroscope also has an integrated temperature sensor that provides a temperature measure,
which is used for a correction offset value of the
angular rate according to the current temperature.
This correction is based on (Weinberg, 2009).
An important feature of this component is
that it provides an output voltage proportional
to its angular velocity (from 3000 s to 3000 s).
So, the angular position used in the control law of
the yaw angle is only obtained after a numerical
integration of the velocity signal. Therefore, the
aforementioned temperature correction is essential
to reduce drift errors due to the integration.
In order to calibrate the sensor, the gyroscope
was connected to the data acquisition system as
described in (Kuhn, 2011), and some experiments
were performed. The gyroscope was subjected to
the following angular positions 00 , 900 , 1800 ,
2700 , 3600 , 2700 , 1800 , 900 , 00 , 900 , 1800 ,
2700 , 3600 , 2700 , 1800 , 900 , 00 , 900 , 00 ,
900 , and 00 . At the end of this sequence, the sensor was subjected to random vibrations and motions before being repositioned at 0  (initial orientation). The captured signal was then numerically
integrated to verify whether the obtained angular
positions corresponded to those imposed on the
experiment. These results are presented in Figs.
4-5.
It can be seen that the angular position signal has small errors with respect to right angles,
but tend to increase with time due to the numerical integration operation and, mainly, the Angle
Random Walk which is an inherent characteristic of the sensor itself (Stockwell, 2003). After

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Figure 4 Gyroscope angular velocity signal.

Figure 5 Angular position signal (numerical integration).

3

Control System

The control system implemented in this work is
shown in the Fig. 6. It can be seen that each
one of the input physical passes through a LPF
(Low Pass Filter). These filters are intended to
eliminate spurious high frequency noise that can
occur during normal system operation.
The output signal of the depth controller (uh )
goes directly to the top thrusters, because they are
responsible only for the heave motion of the vehicle. Although these thrusters make possible a roll
motion, it is not exploited, because it is already
controlled passively by the restorative torques action. The horizontal thrusters is driven by yaw
motion controller (uy ).
The heave motion control is made by a proportional, integral and derivative (PID) controller.
In this controller, it was used a forgetting window
in the integral component (Gomes and Bier, 1998).
This window consists of evaluating only N elements to compose the sum of integral component
errors. The discretized mathematical expression
implemented for this controller is shown in Eq. 1.

2323

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

where uy (tk ) is the output signal of the yaw motion controller in the actual instant, Kpy and Kdy
are the proportional and derivative gains, respectively, of the yaw motion controller, ey (tk ) is the
yaw angle error signal sampled in the actual instant, ey (tk1 ) is the yaw angle error signal in the
previous sampling instant, and T is the sampling
time.
As we do not have a reliable dynamic model
of the ROV, the parameters of the heave and yaw
controllers were tuned by trial and error, but using the following procedure first a PD control
was established and later it was added the integral
component, gradually increasing its participation
in the control action.
4
4.1
Figure 6 Overview of the control system.

uh (tk )  Kph .eh (tk ) + Kih .T.

k
X

eh (ti ) . . .

ik+1Nh

+Kdh (eh (tk )  eh (tk1 ))T,
where uh (tk ) is the output signal of the heave
motion controller in the actual instant, Kph ,
Kih , and Kdh are the proportional, integral, and
derivative gains, respectively, of the heave motion
controller, eh (tk ) is the depth error signal sampled in the actual instant, Nh is the number of
elements in the forgetting
window of the heave
Pk
motion controller, ik+1Nh is the sum of the
last Nh samples of the depth error signal, eh (tk1 )
is the depth error signal in the previous sampling
instant, and T is the sampling time.
As shown in (Gomes and Bier, 1998), a forgetting window in the integral component of a PID
gives more stability to the digital implementation
of control, it makes unnecessary the use of torque
saturation and the number of elements of the window becomes more a design parameter.
The angular rate information from the gyroscope is numerically integrated to obtain the angular position. The yaw motion controller implemented was a proportional and derivative (PD),
because it showed a good performance and stability in the tracking of constant references (suitable
for inspection tasks that need to keep an object
in the center of the camera image without angular
deviations). The discretized mathematical expression, implemented for this controller is presented
in Eq. 2.
uy (tk )  Kpy .ey (tk ) + Kdy (ey (tk )  ey (tk1 ))T,
(2)

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Experimental Results

Considerations

Experimental tests with ROVFURG-II were performed in an indoor pool of 1.4 m depth. This
means that the vehicle was not subject to environmental disturbances represented by the waves,
ocean currents, and winds. Thus, the traction effects of the umbilical cable decrease considerably,
not adding extra difficulties to the control system.
(1) The non linearity of the thrusters response curve
was not considered, in a manner that each actuator produces a maximum thrust of 10.67 N.
The processing time of information from sensors is variable, however, remained lower than the
fixed sampling time (100 ms), it does not influence
the control system performance. The experiment
presented was repeated five times, producing similar results.
4.2

Reference Trajectory

The choice of a reference trajectory with heave
and yaw motions, took into account the noncontrollability of the sway motion (does not have
side thrusters). Therefore, it was defined a reference with a vertical motion for tracking a structure.
The depth reference was a ramp with an inclination of 5 cms, so the vehicle run 50 cm in
10 s and then returned to its initial position in
20 s. This trajectory is continuously repeated and
always with a constant speed of 5 cms.
In order to the target structure remain at the
center of the image during inspection, the vehicle
should not have angular variations around its vertical axis. For this reason, the yaw angle reference
signal is constant, i.e., soon as the automatic control is activated the angular position is assumed
to be 00 and, thereafter, the control law acts to
keep this angle null.
It should be emphasized that, while tracking
the reference trajectory, the vehicle may suffer a

2324

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

lateral shift (sway) due to water movement, traction of the umbilical cable or other type of disturbance. However, this drift does not have how to
be corrected due to absence of lateral actuators in
the vehicle.
4.3

Control System Response

Fig. 7 shows the ROVFURG-II in a pool in front
of a metallic structure. The experiments are executed with two degrees of freedom automatically
controlled and the operator only needs to determine the distance to the structure in order to visual inspect. It could be accomplished using the
zoom function of the video camera or the joystick controller.

Figure 9 Depth error of the vehicle.

Figure 10 Thrust of the top actuators.

Figure 7 ROVFURG-II during the experiments.
Figs. 8-11 show the movements described by
the vehicle over the control action.

Figure 8 Depth of the vehicle.
Based on these results, it becomes clear the
difficulty of the controller to keep the vehicle on
the specified trajectory, especially in the moments
when there were inversion of the movement direction (10 s, 20 s, 30 s...), since in these instances it
has to deal with the water flow in the opposite direction. It is observed in Fig. 9, the position error
in these critical points is approximately 8 cm, but
remains about 4 cm in the rest of the trajectory.
The top thrusters operate with up 50 of
its maximum power at instants of change in the
movement direction, as it can be seen in Fig. 10.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Note that the motion described by the ROV
at the ramp represents the signal depth quantization, i.e., the levels resulting from the signal discretization (Tocci et al., 2010). This occurs due to
the low resolution of analog-to-digital converter of
the micro controller (10 bits) and the sensitivity
of the depth sensor (18.8 mVkPa). Since a resolution of 10 bits and the zero is used for control, it
allows 1023 different voltage levels, the minimum
variation experienced by the converter is 4.89 mV
(5 V1023). Therefore, the smallest depth change
detected is approximately 2.65 cm. This variation
can be seen in Fig. 8. Given this limitation, it
can be concluded that the results obtained were
acceptable.
The response curve of the yaw motion obtained by integrating angular velocity signal of
the gyroscope is shown in Fig. 11. In this figure,
one can note that even after one minute of integration, the greatest yaw angle error remains less
than 40 , which is a satisfactory result for underwater inspection, since this drift is not perceptible
visually.
The system response as a whole has been quite
interesting, but it is probable that a greater refinement of the controllers parameters could further
improve system performance.
5

Conclusion

This paper presented results of the depth and orientation control of an ROV to help perform auto-

2325

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

References
Aguilar, L. (2007). Controle inteligente para
a navegacao de veiculos submarinos semiautonomos (in portuguese), Masters thesis,
Control and Automation Engineering - Polytechnic School of Univ. of Sao Paulo.

Figure 11 Yaw angle.

matic inspections tasks of a submerged structure,
using a low cost embedded minimal instrumentation, dispensing the use of central inertial.
A pressure sensor was used to observe the inertial measurement of the vertical position, i.e.,
the depth vehicle. The angular position around
the vertical axis of the ROV, the yaw angle, was
controlled from the signal provided by a gyroscope. Graphically, it was observed that the results obtained had small errors in the tracking of
the reference trajectory, but that in general, were
visually imperceptible and are considered satisfactory for help in the manual inspection operations
with ROVFURG-II. However, it is quite probable
that a greater refinement of the controllers parameters could further improve system performance.
Future works will involve the control of others
degrees of freedom of the ROVFURG-II, through
signals from the sensors and the processing of images captured by embedded video camera. For
this, side thrusters that allow the vehicle to develop sway motion will be installed.
Other important future work is make our
ROV autonomous, changing it to an AUV (Autonomous Underwater Vehicle). It includes improve the processing power and energy capabilities inside the ROV. Finally, we intent to deal
with underwater image problems. It is related to
the participating media problem and some new algorithms have been studied to improve the quality
of the video captured by camera. It could improve
the capabilities to obtain the localization and the
environment map giving more autonomy to the
vehicle.

Acknowledgment
Thanks CNPQ, CAPES and FAPERGS by partially support this project, and to colleagues from
NuMA-FURG (Applied Mathematics Center) and
NAuteC-FURG (Automation and Computer Center). Also thanks to the colleagues from IFSUL,
campus Pelotas and Charqueadas, by helping in
this work.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Akcakaya, H., Yildiz, H. A., G., S. and F.,
G. (2009). Sliding mode control of autonomous underwater vehicle, International
Conference on Electrical and Electronics Engineering (ELECO).
Akkizidis, I., Roberts, G., Ridao, P. and Batlle, J.
(2003). Designing a fuzzy-like pd controller
for an underwater robot, Control Eng. Practice 11 471480.
Analog Devices (2011). ADXRS610 Yaw Rate
Gyro, Available online.
Bagheri, A., Amanifard, N., Karimi, T., Farahani,
M. H. and Besarati, S. M. (2006). Adaptive
neural network control of an underwater remotely operated vehicle (rov), Proceedings of
the 10th WSEAS international conference on
Computers, ICCOMP06, pp. 623628.
Cadena, A. (2011). Development of a low cost
autonomous underwater vehicle for antarctic
exploration, Technologies for Practical Robot
Applications (TePRA), 2011 IEEE Conference on, pp. 76 81.
Calvo, O., Sousa, A., Bibiloni, J., Curti, H.,
Acosta, G. and Rozenfelt, A. (2009). Lowcost autonomous underwater vehicle for underwater acoustic inspections, Journal of
Maritime Research 6(2) 3752.
Centeno, M. (2007). Rovfurg-ii Projeto e construcao de um veiculo subaquatico nao tripulado de baixo_custo (in portuguese), Masters
thesis, Oceanic Engineering - Federal University of Rio Grande (FURG).
Freescale Semiconductors (2011). Integrated silicon pressure sensor on-chip signal conditioned, temperature compensated and calibrated MPX4250 Series, Available online.
Gomes, S. (2011). Modelagem e controle de atuadores roboticos e veiculos subaquaticos nao
tripulados (in portuguse), Masters thesis,
Oceanic Engineering - Federal University of
Rio Grande (FURG).
Gomes, S., S. C. P. and Bier, C. C. (1998). Estudo sobre trajetorias de controle para robos
manipuladores (in portuguese), XII Brazilian
Conference in Automatic.

2326

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Guo, J., Chiu, F.-C. and Huang, C.-C. (2003).
Design of a sliding mode fuzzy controller
for the guidance and control of an autonomous underwater vehicle, Ocean Engineering 30(16) 2137  2155.
Karras, G. C., Loizou, S. G. and Kyriakopoulos, K. J. (2011). Towards semi-autonomous
operation of under-actuated underwater vehicles sensor fusion, on-line identification
and visual servo control, Autonomous Robots
31 6786.
Kucuk, K. (2007). Modeling and motion simulation of an underwater vehicle, Masters thesis, Mech. Eng., Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey.
Kuhn, V. (2011). Controle automatico de um veiculo de inspecao subaquatica utilizando sensoriamento de baixo_custo (in portuguese),
Masters thesis, Oceanic Engineering - Federal University of Rio Grande (FURG).
Li, J.-H. and Lee, P.-M. (2005). A neural network adaptive_controller design for free-pitchangle diving behavior of an autonomous underwater vehicle, Robotics and Autonomous
Systems 52(2-3) 132147.
Liang, X., Gan, Y. and Wan, L. (2010). Motion
controller for autonomous underwater vehicle based on parallel neural network, International Journal of Digital Content Technology
and its Applications (JDCTA) 4(9) 6167.
Luque, J. (2007). Controle robusto multivariavel
para um veculo submersvel autonomo (in
portuguese), Masters thesis, Mechanical Engineering - Polytechnic School of Univ. of Sao
Paulo.
Moraes, C. (2005). Rovfurg-i Projeto e construcao de um veiculo subaquatico nao tripulado
de baixo_custo (in portuguese), Masters thesis, Oceanic Engineering - Federal University
of Rio Grande (FURG).
Nagashima, Y., N.Taguchi, T.Ishimatsu and
Izokami, T. (2002). Development of a compact autonomous underwater vehicle using
variable vector propeller, Proceedings of the
International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference.

opment, 2010 Second International Conference on, pp. 849853.
Seabotix Inc. (2007). Standard thruster  2 wire
whip BTD150 Specifications, Available online.
Sebastian, E. (2006). Adaptive fuzzy sliding mode
controller for the snorkel underwater vehicle,
9th International Conference on Simulation
of Adaptive Behavior, pp. 855866.
Shi, Y., Qian, W., Yan, W. and Li, J. (2006).
Adaptive depth control for autonomous underwater vehicles based on feedforward neural networks, in D.-S. Huang, K. Li and
G. W. Irwin (eds), Intelligent Control and
Automation, Vol. 344 of Lecture Notes in
Control and Information Sciences, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, chapter 29, pp. 207218.
Stockwell, W. (2003). Angle Random Walk, Crossbow Technology Inc., Milpitas, CA.
Tavares, A. (2003). Um estudo sobre modelagem e
o controle de veiculos subaquaticos nao tripulados, Masters thesis, Oceanic Engineering
- Federal University of Rio Grande (FURG).
Tocci, R. J., Widmer, N. and Moss, G. (2010).
Digital Systems Principles and Applications,
Prentice Hall.
Wang, B., Wan, L., ru Xu, Y. and bai Qin, Z.
(2009). Modeling and simulation of a mini
auv in spatial motion, Journal of Marine Science and Application 8(1) 712.
Wang, S.-x., Sun, X.-j., Wang, Y.-h., Wu, J.-g.
and Wang, X.-m. (2011). Dynamic modeling
and motion simulation for a winged hybriddriven underwater glider, China Ocean Engineering 25 97112.
Weinberg, H. (2009). Calibrating iMEMS Gyroscopes, Analog Devices Inc., Norwood, MA.
Williams, S. B., Newman, P., Rosenblatt, J., Dissanayake, G. and Durrant-Whyte, H. (2001).
Autonomous underwater navigation and control, Robotica 19 481496.

Narimani, M., Nazem, S. and Loueipour, M.
(2009). Robotics vision-based system for
an underwater pipeline and cable tracker,
OCEANS 2009 - EUROPE, pp. 16.
Salim, M., Noordin, A. and Jahari, A. (2010). A
robust of fuzzy logic and proportional derivative control system for monitoring underwater vehicles, Computer Research and Devel-

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

2327