Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

DYNAMIC FUZZY COGNITIVE MAPS APPLIED IN DEVELOPTMENT TECHNIQUE INSPIRED IN
SWARM ROBOTICS
IVAN R. CHRUN, MÁRCIO MENDONÇA E BERNARDO DA SILVA
Departamento de Engenharia Elétrica, Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná
Av. Alberto Carrazai 1640, CEP 86300-000, Cornelio Procópio, Paraná, Brasil.
E-mails ivanchrun@gmail.com, mmendoncautfpr@gmail.com, coco.bernardo@yahoo.com.br.

LÚCIA VALÉRIA RAMOS DE ARRUDA
Laboratório de Automação e Sistemas de Controle Avançado (LASCA), Universidade Tecnológica Federal do
Paraná
Av. Sete de Setembro, 3165, CEP 80230-901, Curitiba, Paraná, Brasil.
E-mail lvrarruda@utfpr.edu.br.
ELPINIKI PAPAGEORGIOU
Department of Informatics and Computer Technology , Technological Education Institute of Lamia
3rd Km Old National Road, TK 35100, Lamia - Athens, Greece.
E-mailepapageorgiou@teilam.gr.
Abstract This work presents a cooperative architecture for autonomous agents based on dynamic-fuzzy cognitive maps (DFCM), an evolution of fuzzy cognitive maps (FCM). This architecture is used to develop an autonomous navigation system for
mobile robots, which has capacity for learning, self-adaptation and behavior management. The developed navigation system
adopts a multi-agent approach, based on subsumption architecture of Brooks, which allows hierarchical management of actions
and parallel processing. Reinforcement learning is used to self-tune the system allowing D-FCM to be self-adaptive. A bioinspired strategy in ants behavior is used for communication between agents and simulated in a virtual environment, comparing
the results with another method of cooperation that is based on navigation data.
Keywords Dynamic Cognitive Maps, Cooperative Autonomous Agents, Subsumption Architecture, Swarm Robotics, Multiagent systems.
Resumo Esse trabalho apresenta uma arquitetura cooperativa para agentes autônomos baseados em mapas_cognitivos fuzzy
dinâmicos (D-FCM), uma evolução de mapas_cognitivos fuzzy (FCM). Essa arquitetura é usada para desenvolver um sistema de
navegação autônomo para robôs_móveis, que apresenta capacidade de aprendizado, habilidades de auto-adaptação e gestão de
comportamentos. O sistema de navegação desenvolvido adota uma abordagem multi-agentes, baseados na arquitetura de
subsunção de Brooks, que permite um gerenciamento hierárquico de ações e processamento_paralelo. Aprendizado por reforço é
utilizado para uma auto-sintonia do sistema, permitindo a D-FCM ser auto-adaptativa. Uma estratégia bio-inspirada no
comportamento das formigas, é utilizado para a comunicação entre agentes, e simuladas em um ambiente_virtual, comparando-a
com um outro método de cooperação, baseado em dados de navegação.
Palavras-chave .

1

known environments. In this context, we can mention
SLAM techniques (Gouda, Gomaa and Ogawa,
2013). Swarm robotics emerges as a potential tool in
the coordination task of mobile agents.
In this work, mobile robots with exploration
abilities share the information with other mobile
robots and the method used to share the information
is inspired by the behavior of ants, implementing
concepts of artificial pheromone.
Generally, Artificial Intelligence (AI) has application in various areas of knowledge such as neurobiological, mathematics, computer science, among
others. The research area of intelligent system aim at
developing computational methods that tries to imitate or approximate the capacity of humans being to
solve problems. These new methods attempt to emulate the ability of humans to cope with very complex
processes, based on inaccurate and  or approximate

Introduction

Research in autonomous robotics, in particular
collective robotics using biological inspired systems
by social insects (collective intelligence) are knows
in the literature. Works on Swarm Robotics using
group of robots inspired by insect colony behavior
can be found in (Mohan and Ponnambalam, 2009).
The term Swarm Intelligence refers to sophisticated collective behavior that can emerge from the
combination of many simple individuals, each operating autonomously (Sharkey, 2006). Swarm intelligence is a property of systems of non-intelligent
robots exhibiting collectively intelligent behavior.
Techniques of robot coordination have been applied in different application areas, especially applications in reconnaissance and exploration of un-

1217

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

proposed. This architecture allows an operator to
monitor and guide a swarm of robots to complete
certain tasks through an agent by a GUI (graphical
user interface). The robots are divided into local and
social agents, where the local agents have the function to move, avoid obstacles and location. The control algorithm is implemented in the social agent
based on an adapted version of PSO technique, a
method developed by Kennedy, Eberhart and Shi
(2001) to simulate behaviors of swarm, insect colonies and flocks of birds. The work Mendonça et.al.
(2013) uses a DCN (Dynamic Cognitive Networks)
for navigation and sharing memory path in unknown
scenarios with explorer robots.
This paper discusses problems with sequential
decisions in partially or totally unknown environment with multiple objectives. At this level of complexity the proposed architecture presents learning,
tuning and adaptation capacity, action management,
and finally, at the highest level of the D-FCM (Dynamic-Fuzzy Cognitive Maps) architecture.
And finally, a concept explored in this work is
collective intelligence, in which the architecture uses
the agent capacity of evolution. Evolution is conceptually different from learning because an agent can
only evolve if it inherits knowledge from another
agent, while learning the agent only needs himself
(De Castro, 2007).
This paper is organized as follow section 2 presents a brief discussion of Fuzzy Cognitive Maps.
Section 3 describes briefly the architecture of the DFCM. Section 4 presents the simulated initial results.
And, finally, section 5 shows the conclusions and
finish the paper.

information. However this information can be obtained from the specialist knowledge and  or operational data or behavior of an industrial system
(Passino and Yourkovich, 1997).
Specifically, researches in autonomous navigation are in ascent phase. Autonomous systems have
the ability to perform complex tasks with a high
degree of success (Russel and Norvig, 1995). In this
context, the complexity involved in trajectories generation tasks are admittedly high and in many cases,
requires the autonomous system being able to learn a
navigation strategy through interaction with the environment (Calvo, 2007).
There are studies in the literature that uses heuristic knowledge for modeling decision making in
autonomous navigation through fuzzy systems (Siraj
et al, 2001 Melhotra and Sakar, 2005 Astudillo et
al, 2006 Min et al, 2006 Pipe, 2000 Yeap et al,
2006 Mendonca, 2011).
Researches in autonomous robotics, in particular
collective robotics using biological systems inspired
by social insects (collective intelligence) are known
in the literature. Works about collective robots
Swarm Robotics (Bayindir and Sahin, 2007). Parker (2008) uses robots groups inspired by insect
colony behavior to manage agents at their functions
execution exploration in environment. The application of techniques andor concepts of collective robots are related to autonomous system and multiagent systems. The theory of multi-agent systems are
usually required to solve problems in dynamic and
unpredictable environments. In such circumstances, a
capacity to learn is particularly important for environment with rapid change (Wooldridge and Jennings, 1995). From autonomous agents theory, particularly cooperative autonomous agents, it should be
emphasized the ability of autonomy of the agent,
alone andor in a group, ie, the success in different
settings without human intervention (Russel and
Norvig, 1995).
It is possible to find works in literature that uses
multi-robot agents for robotic navigation. System
using FCM (Fuzzy Cognitive Maps) is developed for
cleaning robots that work cooperatively through
heuristic knowledge, which organize priorities for
running tasks. Another example for Swarm Robotics
can be found in Payton, Estkowski and Howard
(2001), in which a multiple robot system uses a virtual pheromone through transceivers mounted on
the surface of each robot of the cluster, thereby allowing communication between them about location
of resources found. WeiXing and colleagues (2006)
proposes a novel algorithm for coordinating a micro
swarm of underwater robots to allow assembly and
formation. This algorithm works from a repulsion
and attraction model from the distance between the
robots in the swarm. A leader robot is necessary in
the system to indicate where the group should proceed.
A multiple agents control architecture for
swarm_robotics was developed in Vasile, Pavel and
Buiu (2011), where a man-swarm interface was

2 Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
Cognitive maps were first presented by Axelrod
(1976) in order to express the cause-effect relationships of the elements of an environment in binary
values. Fuzzy cognitive maps have enjoyed a visible
position in fuzzy modeling as graph-oriented models
describing relationships among concepts (Pedrycs
Homenda, 2013). Fuzzy cognitive maps are fuzzy
signed digraphs with feedbacks, and they can model
the events, values, goals as a collection of concepts
by forging a causal link between these concepts
(Kosko, 1986). High flexibility and fast adaptability
can be stated as the main advantages of FCMs (Aguilar, 2005). As mentioned in (Papageorgiou and
Salmeron, 2013), there is an enormous interest in
FCMs and this interest on the part of researchers and
industry is increasing, especially in the areas of control (Stylios and Groumpos, 1998 Stylios and
Groumpos, 2004 Papageorgiou, Stylios and Groumpos, 2006), business (Lee and Ahn, 2009 Glykas,
2013), medicine (Papageorgiou, Roo and Huszka,
2012 Papageorgiou and Froelich, 2012 Papageorgiou, 2011 Douali et. al., 2011), robotics (Motlagh et
al., 2012 Motlagh et al., 2012), environmental science (Kok, 2009 Ramsey et. al., 2012 Acampora
1218

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

and Loia, 2011) and information technology (Buyukozkan and Vardaloglu, 2012 Lee and Lee, 2012).
Generally, there are two types of FCMs named
manual FCMs and automated FCMs. The only difference between them is their production ways.
Manual FCMs are produced by experts manually and
automated FCMs are produced by other information
sources numerically, example historical data (Yesil et
al, 2013).
In this work the D-FCM, one of the proposed
evolution of the FCM, is developed directly by experts knowledge. In other words, the concepts and
relationships between them are modeled by heuristic
or empirical knowledge of experts.

For this method, two new concepts were implemented to the D-FCM, the Navigation Memory
(C10) and Weighting (C11). The concept C10 saves
the navigation data and shares them. It is noteworthy
that there is no causality between the concepts C5C6
and C10, represented by the red dotted line, that only
acquire the data to be saved in the memory. The
concept C11 treats and weighs the information from
the outputs C5 and C6 with C10. After this treatment
is done, C5 and C6 receive new values.
The second strategy is inspired in ants colony
communication for foraging, in which the ant releases a chemical (called pheromone) to demarcate the
path traveled. Transmitting and receiving data implicitly on the path taken by the colony. In other
words, the agent will travel through the environment
and leave demarcations (pheromones) about his path
taken in the environment, and other agent interpret
that pheromone and use it to aid his decision making.
To implement this strategy, three new concepts were
added to the D-FCM, the concept of Pheromone
Release (C10), Weightings (C12) and Pheromone
Detection (C11). Also two new concepts of selection
are added, WS5 and WS6. The figure 2 shows a
simplified model of this method. Where the concepts
S.E., S.F. and S.D. are related to the left, frontal and
right sensors, respectively. The black dotted lines
imply in concept values that are used only to select
the state of the D-FCM.

3 Architecture D-FCM
The D-FCM architecture is inspired by the classical subsumption architecture. For this work, two
cooperation strategies are addressed, the first one
share the trajectory information and the second one,
shares information through pheromones.
Both strategies used are inspired by ant colonies
(Swarm Robotics). As follows the first agent move
through the environment and leaves a navigation
memory stored, the next agent use this navigation
experience in his decision making. Intuitively these
strategies enhance the decisions of the maneuvers
taken by the agent, especially the drastic maneuvers
ones. The main difference between these cooperation
strategies are the method of how the information is
transmitted to the next agent.
The method of trajectory sharing aims to explore
the navigation memory acquired by the previous
agent during his navigation time. The navigation data
is stored in an array and transmitted to the next agent.
This agent will consider this information with the
values obtained by the D-FCM, using 5 of the
information obtained from the previous agents, aiding in his decision making.
The figure 1 shows a simplified version of this
trajectory-sharing strategy. Where the concepts V.E.
and V.R. are related to the outputs turn left and turn
right, respectively. The variables W1316 represent
the causal relationships between concepts.

Figure 2  Simplified D-FCM model for data processing in pheromone sharing strategy.

The C10 concept manages the pheromones to be
released by the agent, if the selection criteria are met
(WS5). The C11 concept is a new input variable
for the D-FCM, similar to the input sensors, this
concept detects the pheromones left by other agents.
These pheromones are considered as secondary targets, not being necessary for the agent to capture it,
however, helping in the decision making process of
the system, anticipating obstacle avoidance maneuvers or on capturing targets. A selection system between the concepts C11 and C12 will alter the causal
relationship of W12, referring to its intensity, given
by the selection rule WS6. The C12 concept is similar to the Weighting concept from the trajectory

Figure 1  Simplified D-FCM model for data processing in trajectory sharing strategy.

1219

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

205) of the robot trajectory. The graph also shows
the dynamic path traversed by the agent. The flaws in
the trajectory represent the speed ups, when the sensors dont detect any obstacles or targets, the robot
accelerates. In all experiments was found that the
robot reaches the destination point within a -8, 8
range. The figure 3 shows the virtual environment
used for the simulation.
In these experiments, an unexpected dynamic
obstacle appears on the scenario when the robot is
passing by the coordinates (6, 88), in this region
there is a critical situation. The presence of dynamic
obstacles increases the difficulty of the strategy employed by the controller (Pratihar Jain, 2010). Right
after moving to divert the mobile obstacle, the agent
faces a wall of obstacles created by the unexpected
obstacles. Similarly, the mobile obstacle traverses a
linear path between the points (-11, 86) and (3, 86),
so that the mobile robot will need to decide on the
action to be taken

sharing strategy. This concept will weigh the information acquired by the outputs C5 and C6 and the
information from the pheromone reading. C5 and C6
will receive new values after the treatment is done.
A counter is also inserted into WS5, specifically
to assist when the state of release pheromone is triggered, giving it some periodicity. This counter will
decrease in values that are directly related to the
intensity of the outputs V.E. and V.R., in other
words, the value subtracted from the counter will be
higher when V.E. and V.R. are high, and lower when
the V.E. and V.R. are low. For instance, some of the
rules for the selection methods WS5 and WS6 are
 (Ws5) IF (V.E. and V.R. are high AND
counter is low) OR (counter is very low) THEN
Pheromone Release is triggered.
 (Ws6) IF detected an obstacle THEN the
weight W12 is medium.
 (Ws6) IF detected a target THEN the
weight W12 is low.

(Ws6) IF did not detected a target or obstacle THEN the weight W12 is high.
Briefly, the cooperative system covers techniques or models for cooperative navigation. The
strategy used for this work was inspired by Swarm
Robotics. Therefore, the agent will use the experience from another agent as follow the first agent
passes and leaves a pheromone in the environment,
or a data stored in a navigation memory, the nexts
agents will use this navigation experience in their
decision making.
In the test scenarios there are fixed, dynamic and
unexpected (arise during the course) obstacles, as
will be demonstrated in the next topic. Therefore, in
a simplified form, the expectation of the Swarm
Robotics concepts applied in the D-FCM architecture
aims to increase the performance of a group of
agents, performing tasks with higher level of complexity.

Figure 3  Simulated Environment.

4 Results
A simulation environment with 2-D animation
was developed to test and validate the proposed cooperation navigation system. In the simulation environment, the trail with three colors symbolizes the
mobile robot. The light + signs represents the static
and unexpected obstacles, the strong * sign represent the dynamic obstacle and the . sign represent
the pheromones left by the agent, they are represented by two colors, yellows for pheromones released
by other agents and green for the ones release by the
agent. The  represent the targets. In the simulation, a track or trail is used to show the trajectory of
the dynamic obstacle.
The results are shown in the following figures.
In these figures, the graph shows a scene in the plane
XY with a starting point (15, 0) and end point (0,

Figure 4  First agent  D-FCM with trajectory sharing.

The figures 4, 5 and 6 show the navigation path
using the first cooperation method, which the information stored in a memory about the path taken by
previous agent.
The figure 4 shows the simulation result of a
first agent navigating through the unknown environment.

1220

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Figures 7, 9 and 11 show the results obtained by
the cooperation method using pheromones. Figures
8, 10 and 12 shows the trail of pheromones left by
the agent.

There is a critical point near the point y110,
where the agent trigger the reverse state to divert the
obstacle. The agent must also perform the reverse
maneuver to divert the obstacle in figure 5 as well.
Figure 6 shows the trajectory of the third agent. This
agent is able to bypass the obstacles in the critical
point (y110) without triggering the reverse state,
but he does not reach the first target. It is noticed also
that the trajectory of the agents is smoothed comparing the first and the third agent trajectories.

Figure 8  First agent  D-FCM with Pheromone sharing - Trail of
pheromone.

Figure 5  Second agent  D-FCM with trajectory sharing.

Figure 9  Second agent  D-FCM with Pheromone sharing.

The agents in the figure 4 and 7, being a first
navigation, both agents dont have any shared information, so their trajectories are the same.

Figure 6 Third agent  D-FCM with trajectory sharing.

Figure 7  First agent  D-FCM with Pheromone sharing.

Figure 10  Second agent  D-FCM with Pheromone sharing Trail of pheromone.

1221

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

And finally the capacity of exploration group
tends to be increased when there is collaboration
between team members. The purpose of this study
was achieved by exploring an unknown environment
only with sensor detection distance between objects
without the use of camera.
Further studies aims on improving the cooperative system, to allow the coexistence of multiple
agents performing tasks in groups. New features
should also be added, such as power management. A
comparison of the presented architecture with similar
architectures (fuzzy system, neural networks and
neuro-fuzzy system) will also be addressed. And
finally, proposes the implementation of the D-FCM
architecture on real robotic platforms.

Figure 11  Third  D-FCM with Pheromone sharing.

References
Acampora, G.and Loia, V. (2011). On the Temporal
Granularity in Fuzzy Cognitive Maps, IEEE
Transactions Fuzzy Systems, vol 19 no 6, pp.
1040-1057.
Aguilar, J. A. (2005). Survey about Fuzzy Cognitive
Maps Papers. International Journal of Computational Cognition, vol. 3 no. 2, pp. 2733.
Astudillo, L. Castillo, O. Melin P. Alanis, A. Soria, J. and Aguilar, L. T. (2006). Intelligent Control of an Autonomous Mobile Robot using
Type-2 Fuzzy Logic. Engineering Letters, v. 13,
n. 2.
Axelrod, R. (1976). Structure of Decision The Cognitive Maps of Political. Elites. Princeton,
NJ Princeton Univ. Press.
Bayindir, L. and Sahin, E. (2007). A Review of
Studies in Swarm Robotics.Kovan Research
Lab., Dept. of Computer Eng. Middle East
Technical University, Ankara Turkey. In Turk
J Elec Engin, v.15, n.2.
Buyukozkan, G. and Vardaloglu, Z. (2012). Analyzing Of CPFR Success Factors Using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps in Retail Industry. Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 39 no. 12, pp.1043810455.
Calvo, R. (2007). Arquitetura Híbrida Inteligente
para Navegação Autônoma de Robôs.
Dissertação. USP  São Carlos.
De Castro, L. N. (2007). Fundamentals of Natural
Computing An overview. Physics of Life
Reviews, v. 4, p. 1-36.
Douali, N. Papageorgiou, E. I. Roo, J. De and Jaulent, M. C. (2011). Case Based Fuzzy Cognitive
Maps New Method for Medical Reasoning
Comparison Study Between CBFCMFCM.
IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), pp. 844850.
Glykas, M. (2013). Fuzzy Cognitive Strategic Maps
In Business Processperformance Measurement.
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 40, no. 1,
pp. 114.
Gouda, W., Gomaa, W. and Ogawa, T. (2013).
Vision based SLAM for humanoid robots A

Figure 12  Third agent  D-FCM with Pheromone sharing - Trail
of pheromone.

5 Conclusion
This paper presents an architecture for cooperative autonomous agents based on dynamic-fuzzy
cognitive maps and inspired by concepts of Swarm
Robotics. The subsumption architecture proposed
allow decision making in a dynamic environment,
three different mapping layers that model different
types of knowledge. These layers works together to
contribute successfully implementation of the strategy. Moreover, training methods are used for calibration of offline model and experience sharing among
agents. A reinforcement learning algorithm is also
used for the model tuning.
The results presented indicate that the D-FCM
model demonstrated a capacity for leaning, adaptation and cooperation, allowing the agent to be rational, ie, during the navigation, the inferences of certain
sequences of actions allowed the agent to achieve its
goals (explore environment, avoid obstacles and
capture targets) with good performance. Highlights
the cooperation between agents, in particular the
second course of the second experiment, when the
reverse motion was not required from the agent, in
order to avoid the obstacles in the critical situation in
the environment.

1222

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

survey. IEEE Communications and Computers
(JEC-ECC), 2013 Japan-Egypt International
Conference on Electronics. pp 170-175.
Kok, K. (2009). The Potential of Fuzzy Cognitive
Maps for Semi-Quantitative Scenario Development, With an Example from Brazil. Global Environmental Change, vol. 19 no. 1, pp. 122-133.
Kosko, B. (1986). Fuzzy cognitive maps, International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, vol. 24,
pp. 6575.
Lee, S. and Ahn, H. (2009). Fuzzy Cognitive Map
Based On Structural Equation Modeling For the
Design of Controls in Business-to-Consumer
Ecommerce Web-Based Systems. Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 36 no. 7, pp. 1044710460.
Lee, K. C. and Lee, S. (2012). A Causal KnowledgeBased Expert System for Planning an InternetBased Stock Trading System. Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 39 no. 10, 8626-8635.
Malhotra, R. and Sarkar, A. (2005) Development of a
Fuzzy Logic Based Mobile Robot for Dynamic
Obstacle Avoidance and Goal Acquisition in an
Unstructured Environment. Proceedings of the
2005 IEEEASME International Monterey, California, USA, p. 24-28.
Mohan, Y. Ponnambalam, S. G., (2009). An extensive review of research in swarm_robotics," Nature  Biologically Inspired Computing, 2009.
NaBIC 2009. World Congress on, vol., no.,
pp.140, 145, 9-11 Dec.
Motlagh, O. Tang, S. H. Ismail, N. and Ramli, A.
R. (2012). An Expert Fuzzy Cognitive Map for
Reactive Navigation of Mobile Robots. Fuzzy
Sets and Systems, vol. 201, pp. 105121
Motlagh, O. Tang, S. H. Ramli, A. R. and Nakhaeinia, D. (2012). An FCM Modeling For Using a Priori Knowledge Application Study in
Modeling Quadruped Walking. Neural Computing  Applications, vol. 21 no. 5, pp. 10071015.
Mendonça, M. (2011). Uma Contribuição ao
Desenvolvimento de Sistemas Inteligentes
Utilizando Redes Cognitivas Dinâmicas. Tese.
Curitiba UTFPR.
Mendonça, M. Chrun, I. R. Arruda, L. V. R. and
Neves J. F. (2013). Arquitetura de Controle para
Agentes Autônomos Cooperativos Através de
Redes Cognitivas Dinâmicas. In O Simpósio
Brasileiro de Automação Inteligente (SBAI),
2013, Fortaleza.
Min, H.Q. Hui J.X. Lu Y-S. and Jiang Jz. (2006).
Probability Fuzzy Cognitive Map for Decisionmaking in Soccer Robotics. Proceedings of the
IEEEWICACM International Conference on
Intelligent Agent Technology (IAT06) 0-76952748-506.
Papageorgiou, E. I. and Salmeron, J. L. (2013). A
Review of Fuzzy Cognitive Map research during
the last decade. Accepted for publication in
IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 21
no. 1, pp. 66-79.

Papageorgiou, E. I. Stylios, C. and Groumpos, P.
(2006). Unsupervised Learning Techniques for
Fine-Tuning Fuzzy Cognitive Map Causal
Links. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, vol. 64, pp. 727743.
Papageorgiou, E. I. Roo, J. D. Huszka, C. and Colaert, D. (2012). Formalization of treatment guidelines using Fuzzy Cognitive Mapping and semantic web tools, Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 45 no.1, pp. 45-60.
Papageorgiou, E. I. and Froelich, W. (2012). Application of Evolutionary Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
for Prediction of Pulmonary Infections. IEEE
Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 16 no. 1, pp. 143-149.
Papageorgiou, E. I. (2011). A New Methodology For
Decisions In Medical Informatics Using Fuzzy
Cognitive Maps Based On Fuzzy RuleExtraction Techniques. Applied Soft Computing,
vol. 11 no. 1, pp. 500513.
Passino, M. K. and Yourkovich, S. (1997). Fuzzy
control. Menlo Park Addison-Wesley.
Payton, D. Estkowski, R. and Howard, M. (2003).
Compound Behaviors in Pheromone Robotics,
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, v .44, p.
229240.
Pedrycz, W. Homenda, W. (2013). From Fuzzy Cognitive Maps to Granular Cognitive Maps. Fuzzy
Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol.PP, no.99,
pp.1, 1, 0
Pipe, A. G. (2000). An Architecture for Building
Potential Field Cognitive Maps in Mobile Robot Navigation.Adaptive Behavior, v. 8, n. 2, p.
173-203.
Pratihar D.K., Jain L.C. Intelligent Autonomous
Systems Foundations and Applications by (Editors) (Springer-Verlag, Germany, 2010).
Ramsey D. S. L. et al. (2012). An Approximate
Bayesian Algorithm For Training Fuzzy Cognitive Map Models Of Forest Responses To Deer
Control In A New Zealand Adaptive Management Experiment. Ecological Modelling, vol.
240, pp. 93-104.
Russell, S. J. and Norvig, P. (1995). Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach. Englewood Cliffs
Prentice Hall.
Sharkey A. J. C., (2006) "The Application of Swarm
Intelligence to Collective Robots" in Advances
in Applied Artificial Intelligence, John Fulcher,
Idea Group Publishing, 2006, pp. 157 - 185.
Siraj, A. Bridges, S. and Vaughn, R. (2001). Fuzzy
Cognitive Maps for Decision Support in an Intelligent Intrusion Detection System. Technical
Report, Department of Computer Science, Mississippi State University. MS 39762.
Stylios, C. D. and Groumpos, P. P. (2004). Modeling
Complex Systems Using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part A Systems and Humans, vol. 34
no. 1, pp. 155-162.
Stylios, C. D. and Groumpos, P. P. (1998). The challenge of modelling supervisory systems using

1223

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

fuzzy cognitive maps, Journal of Intelligent
Manufacturing, vol. 9, pp.339345.
Vasile, C. Pavel, A. and Buiu, C. (2011). Integrating
human swarm interaction in a distributed robotic
control system. Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE
International Conference, p. 743-748.
Weixing, F. Kejun, W. Xiufen, Y. and Shuxiang, G.
(2006). Novel algorithms for coordination of underwater swarm_robotics. Proceedings of the
2006 IEEE International Conference, p. 654659.
Wooldridge, M.J. (2009). An Introduction to Multiagent Systems. Chichester WILLEY.
Yeap, W. K. Wong, C. K. and Schmidt, J. (2006).
Initial Experiments with a Mobile Robot on
Cognitive Mapping.In Proceedings of the 2006
International Symposium on Practical Cognitive
Agents and Robots, Perth, Australia, November
27  28.
Yesil, E. Ozturk, C. Dodurka, M.F. and Sakalli, A.
(2013). Fuzzy cognitive maps learning using Artificial Bee Colony optimization. Fuzzy Systems
(FUZZ), 2013 IEEE International Conference
on, vol., no., pp.1, 8, 7-10 July.

1224