Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

USE OF SMARTPHONES AS A DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SIMULATION PLATFORM IN CONTROL SYSTEMS
EDUCATION
ALLAN DE MEDEIROS MARTINS
Laboratório de Acionamento Controle e Instrumentação, Depto. de Engenharia Elétrica, Universidade Federal
do Rio Grande do Norte
Caixa Postal 1524, 59078-970, Natal, RN
E-mails allan@dee.ufrn.br
Abstract In this paper we show through a practical example, how the current mobile devices platforms can be used to aid the
dynamical systems education. We developed an application that works as a mini-laboratory for dynamical system simulation.
The application has iterative animations for six classical dynamical systems in which the user can alter parameters and use the
sensors in the device (like accelerometers and gyroscope) to produce inputs for the systems. The application was distributed
though an on-line store worldwide and the downloading and usage data for the first weeks were collected. Analysis of that data
shows that the mobile platform combined with worldwide distribution can be a very powerful tool in the control systems education and diffusion.
Resumo Neste artigo mostraremos através de um exemplo prático, como as plataformas de telefones e dispositivos_móveis
podem ser utilizadas para auxiliar a educação em Sistemas de Controle. Desenvolvemos uma aplicação que funciona como um
minilaboratório para simulação de sistemas_dinâmicos. A aplicação tem animações iterativas para seis sistemas_dinâmicos clássicos nos quais o usuário pode alterar parâmetros e usar os sensores no aparelho (como acelerômetros e giroscópios) para produzir
entradas para o sistema. A aplicação foi distribuída através de uma loja on-line mundial e os dados de download e uso do aplicativo foram coletados. Analise dos dados mostra que a plataforma_móvel combinada com a distribuição mundial pode ser uma ferramenta muito ponderosa para educação e difusão da disciplina de sistemas_de_controle.
Keywords Dynamical Systems, Simulation, Mobile Devices, on-line stores, Mobile Applications
Palavras Chave 

Introduction and Motivation

The topic of Control Systems is present in practically all undergraduate courses of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, among others
1,6,7. With the increasing in technology development, machines and devices needs an increasing
knowledge of Dynamical Systems e Control Theory
to be designed and maintained. This scenario enforces an increase in quality of the teaching of such disciplines.
Those disciplines (in particular Control Systems)
often need a laboratory infrastructure that could be
very expensive and difficult to implement 2. Moreover, the access to that infrastructure by the student
is somewhat limited due to the rate of students vs.
number of didactical plants present in the laboratory.
To overcome this situation, modern tools are being applied to bring simulation and iterative computational models even more accessible to the student
3. Tools such as simulation software 4,8, web
tools to facilitate the student access5 and even low
price small models2 have being proposed. Those
tools have a very important role in the education of
such disciplines that depend on expensive and difficult to access laboratory infrastructure.
One of the modern technologies that have being
spread and it is accessible for a large number of students today is the smart phone. Researches on the
smart phone market 10 show that the number students that have access to such a device are increasing
fast. Moreover, the processing power of those devic-

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

es is allowing an increasing number of different applications to run on the device. It is not rare to find
devices with dual-cores processors or large 4inches
screens that allow not only the device to run complex
tasks like simulations, but also they possesses visual
space to show animations and multimedia content.
Another important aspect of those kinds of devices is
that almost all of them have built in sensors like accelerometer and gyroscope that can be accessed by
the applications.
In light of those observations, this paper studies
the use of a smart phone (as a case study) in Control
and Dynamical Systems Education. Basically we
develop an application that simulates six different
dynamical systems that the student can interact with.
The application uses the devices built-in sensors to
produce inputs for the system and allows the student
to change parameters for the system at runtime.
To analyze the impact of the application among
the students, we distributed the application for free in
a large online application marked and collected data
from the number of downloads in the first month of
the distribution. The application is available through
the on-line store or via website (that link to the store)
at the address
httpidynamic.engenheiro-tdah.com

The presentation of the paper is organized as follow In section two we get into the details of the mobile platform used and the developed application. In
section three we analyze the data collected from the
distribution process (downloads of the application)

4326

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

and finally we comment about the results in section
4.
2

Mobile Platform and Developed Applica-

tion
2.1 Mobile platform Used
There are an increasing number of mobile platforms
today that can be used to the end we are proposing in
this paper. Big manufactures like Samsung, Sony,
Motorola, Apple, Nokia, among others, are constantly developing devices (such as mobile phones and
tablets) that has enough processing power to perform
simulations of dynamical systems. Each device runs
one of a few operating systems that were designed
specifically for mobile devices. The most common
operating systems present today are Android, iOS
and Symbian.
As explained in the introduction, we implemented an application that runs in a mobile phone (or
tablet) performing the simulation of dynamical systems. The phone used to perform the study was the
iPhone 3Gs (and later versions) from Apple as well
as its family devices (iPod touch and iPad). In particular the iPhone 3Gs is a mobile phone that has built
in sensors, GPS, large screen and an ARM6 processor. The technical specifications for the iPhone 3Gs
are10
 Processor
o ARMv6 at 600MHz
o 256MB of RAM memory
 Display
o 3.5-inch (diagonal) Multi-Touch display
o 480-by-320-pixel resolution at 163 ppi
o Fingerprint-resistant oleophobic coating
 Sensors
o Accelerometer
o Proximity sensor
o Ambient light sensor
 Power and Battery
o Built-in rechargeable lithium-ion battery
o Charging via USB
In order to analyze the impact of the mobile application into the learning of simulation and dynamical systems, it is necessary to distribute the software
among students. Together with the development of
the mobile technology, it was created the concept of
apps market. Basically it is an online store where
users can easily search, browse and download (free
or paid) applications directly using the device. That
made extremely easy to distribute an application just
posting it into the market. The Apple Store is the
market that distributes applications for the iPhone
platform. It has a system of rating and reviews where
the users can rate or review an application. Also, it
has a backend where the developer can access data
like number of downloads, updates, etc
ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Before an application goes to the market, it must
first go through a process of reviewing by Apple (to
avoid publication of bad material within the applications) and them enters Apple Store. The company
also demands that the user interface for the application must be friendly and intuitive (with good quality
figures and graphs).
For this research, our application followed all
those steps (from design, implementation and distribution) and data were collected during approximately
one month of availability in the Apple Store with a
total of 1057 downloads in 70 countries.
2.2 The Application
The application used in this research was designed to simulate 6 dynamical systems listed bellow
- Linear spring-mass system
- Rotatory spring-mass system
- RLC circuit
- Cart-pendulum system
- Temperature system
- Liquid level system
The application has a menu where the user can
choose which simulation to play and a selector button that can be used to select between the iterative
animation or a page with the theory behind that particular system (basically a PDF file with the derivation of the dynamical equations). The application
menu is showed in the figure 1.

Figure 1 Main menu for the application.

Next we will briefly describe each system present I the application. In all of the simulations the
parameters of the system (such as mass, constants,
resistances, friction, inductance, etc) can be
changed any moment using sliders present in the
simulation screen. Also there is a input button where
the user can choose between two inputs (square and
sinusoidal) that will be applied to the system being
simulated. For each system, an animated picture illustrates the dynamics of the system and the user can
use the sensors to provide inputs (by tilting or rotating the device). Also, there is a button that shows a

4327

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

plot of the variables (input and output) where the
user can analyze the system response.
Linear spring-mass system
This system is composed by a single mass system
over a cart that can move. The spring is attached to
the card by a spring and there is friction between the
mass and the cart. Figure 2 shows the simulation
screen.

This system illustrates well the concept of gear ratio
and the effect of negative signal in the output due to
the connection of the input gear and the transmitting
gear.
RLC circuit
In this system, there is a RLC circuit (drawn in the
screen) connected to a virtual oscilloscope. The circuit is composed by two resistors, a capacitor and a
inductor. All of the component values can be
changed. The user provides the value of the input
voltage with a slider and the response (as well as the
input value itself) is plotted in the virtual oscilloscope. An interesting experiment that can be made
with this system in particular is to try to input an
oscillating signal (sliding the control up and down)
until find the resonance frequency. Figure 4 shows
the simulation screen.

Figure 2 Simulation screen for the spring-mass system.

Here the user can touch the screen and drag the cart
or the mass and, in real time, see the response of the
system. It is also possible to provide input turning the
accelerometer on (small switch in the screen) and, by
tilting the device, force the cart to slide). This simulation illustrates the effect of friction and spring constant with relative positions (cart and mass).
Rotatory spring-mass system
Here the system is composed by a mass (represented
by a heavy tire) connected to two gears of different
sizes. The user can rotate the input gear (smaller one)
and the movement is transmitted in real time to the
larger gear that is connected by the output mass by a
spring. Here the user can turn on the gyroscope sensor and rotate the input gear by rotating the device in
the z-axis (axis perpendicular to the screen). Figure 3
shows the simulation screen.

Figure 4 Simulation screen for the RLC circuit

The output value is also shown in the right slider bar
(that the user cannot change), providing a visual
sense of scale and speed od variation of the voltage.
Cart-pendulum system
This system is composed by a pendulum with a hanging mass connected to a cart that is siting in rails.
The bar is weightless and rigid, and the cart has a
fixed mass. The pendulum have friction as well as
the cart (with the rails). All of the variables (frictions
and hanging mass) can be changed. The input here is
a force applied directly to the cart and the output is
the angle of the pendulum. Figure 5 shows the simulation screen.

Figure 3 Simulation screen for the rotatory spring mass system.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

4328

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Figure 5 Simulation screen for the cart-pendulum system.

Figure 6 Simulation screen for the liquid level system.

In this simulation, the user can control the gravity by
tilting the device. With this feature it is possible to
verify the effect of gravity in the swing frequency,
settling time, etc.

In this simulation the user can also control the gravity (by tilting the device) and see the effect of the
gravity on the output flow (pressure in the valve).
For example the user the completely open the output
valve and still fill the vessel (by leaving the device in
the horizontal position, simulating a zero-gravity
situation).

Temperature system
This is the simplest of the systems, and it is composed by a simple resistance that heats up according
to the input voltage applied to it. The user can change
the thermal capacity and thermal resistance of the
heater. The input of the system is the applied voltage
and the output is the temperature of the resistance.
Figure 6 shows the simulation screen.

2.3 Technical details
All the simulations were performed using the
forth order Runge-Kutta method. Although models
can be linearized 9 to simplify the simulation, they
were not linearized in any operating point to ensure
that the models behave as much as possible like real
plants. The models used are listed in table 1.
Table 1. Dynamical models used in the application.

System

Figure 6 Simulation screen for the temperature system.

During the animation the user can see the temperature rising or falling in the thermometer and also can
have an idea of hot and cold by the incandescence of
the heat element (resistance).
Liquid level system
In this last system, there is a vessel with a input flow
of liquid (controlled by the opening of a valve) and
an output flow (also controlled by a valve). As the
situation suggests, the input of the system is the input
flow and the output is the level of he liquid in the
vessel. The user can control the base area f the vessel
as well as the output flow (disturbance). Figure 7
shows the simulation screen.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

model

Linear
spring-mass

m
xo (t) + bxo (t) + kxo (t) 
k xi (t) + b xi (t)

Rotatory
spring-mass

D
J o (t) + bo (t) +k o (t)   i k i (t)
Dt

RLC circuit

R2 vi (t)  R1CL
vo (t) +
(R1 R2C + L)vo (t) + (R1 + R2 )vo (t)
(M + m)
x(t) +
ml cos( (t))(t)  sin( (t)) 2 (t)  bx x (t)

Cartpendulum

Temperature
Liquid level

(

)

gsin( (t))  
x(t)cos( (t)) + l(t) + b(t)
RCTo (t) + To (t)  Ti (t)
  Qi (t)  a 2gh(t)
h(t)
A
A

In the models, all the values without the time dependency are constants of the system that can be
changed using the sliders present in each screen.
In the about screen we inform this fact to the student (the use of Runge-Kutta method) and comment
about the numerical errors that are present in the
simulation. Instead of asking the students to overlook
those errors, we encourage the students to look for

4329

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

traces of those errors. The most common examples of
traces of those errors are the zero-friction situations.
In most of the cases, systems with zero friction will
not stay running forever, but instead they will eventually dim the movement. This is particularly visible
in the case of non-linear systems (like the Pendulum
system).
Another important pedagogic aspect of this application is the use of the device sensors. It is understood that interactive applications bring more attention to students them static non-dynamic ones. We
believe that the use of the sensors to control things
like gravity or rotation, has a substantially positive
effect in stimulating the student to focus on the system and learn about its behavior.

to the application. In the case of our application, the
keywords were
Dynamical systems
Control
Differential equations
Math
Physics
Electrical Engineering
Another important information present in the
collected data is the country where the download
took place. I the first 6 weeks, a total of 70 countries
had at least one download performed. Table 2 summarizes the per-country download numbers.

3 Some Quantitative Information
To analyze the impact of the application on the
public, it was collected data corresponding to the
number of downloads per week using the tool provided by the company that hosted the application in
the store 10.
This data contains information about the number
of downloads per week separated by country. Figure
8 shows the evolution of the general number of
download (for all countries) corresponding to 6
weeks of observation.

Figure 8Number of downloads for the first 6 weeks.

Each bar corresponds to the number of downloads at each week. It is important to point out that in
the second week, we released an update for the application. In the figure, we can see a rise in the number of downloads in the third week right after the
update). That means that the application is being
used and it is active o the devices (we call those users
active users).
Another interesting fact is the high peak at the
first week. That corresponds to the appearing of the
application in the store when the user sort applications by release date. After that period the only
way to find he application is through the store search.
As we can see the number of downloads after the 4th
week is stable, meaning that there is a constant
search for applications with such functionality. The
store search uses keywords that the developer assigns
ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Table 2. Number of downloads per country.

Country

downloads

updates

USA

223

100

China

98

24

Brazil

90

26

UK

64

36

Italy

59

29

Australia

54

0

Germany

46

25

Mexico

45

0

France

43

16

Spain

32

19

Others

406

141

In the table it is possible to notice by the number
of updates, that countries like USA, UK (United
Kingdom), Italy and Germany are very active countries. Since the update occurred at the end of the first
week, (less them half of the period) we expect half of
the number of downloads were make in the first version and that most of them were probably updated
(indicating active users).
Another interesting fact is that some countries
discovered the application later (when it was already
in the second version) and because of that, o updates
were registered (case of Australia and Mexico).
3.1 Case study (Australia)
To illustrate an interesting fact that has direct
relation with the impact of the application in the
community we will bring forth the data from Australia. In table 1 we can see that Australia was a country
that had o updates and them has a high probability of
having discovered the application latter on. Nevertheless, the download evolution for that country revealed an interesting behavior. Figure 5 illustrates
that behavior.

4330

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

2 Welsh, James Daredia, Talib Sobora, Frank
Vlacic, Ljubo Goodwin, Graham C., Simulated
versus Hardware Laboratories for Control
Education A Critical Appraisal, Proceedings of
the 17th IFAC World Congress, Volume 17, Part
1, 2008

Figure 9 Number of downloads for the first 6 weeks for Australia.

As we can see, only 7 downloads were made for
the first version (none active as there were no updates). The interesting fact is that we the 5th week a
huge peak is observed. Although we cant explain the
cause of the peak, one can speculate that a massive
download occurred probably by a certain group of
people (related to each other). That could mean that
students interested in simulation or dynamical systems downloaded and used the application. If that is
the case, we believe that our thesis that mobile devices and applications could help the learning and
stimulation of subjects like simulation of dynamical
systems.
4 Conclusion
In this paper we presented an application for
simulation of dynamical systems. We tested the use
of such platform in Control Systems and Dynamical
System education by observing the diffusion of the
application throughout the world. We argue that,
given the massive distribution process today in
smartphone applications, it is very easy to reach the
students. Moreover, the interactive media present in
the todays devices (things such as sensors and
touchscreens) allows the implementation of simulations to be very attractive for young students.
The data collected in the first month after the release of the application in the on-line store showed
that this approach of using smartphones and tables as
a tool for education is very promising.

3 P. Antsaklis, T. Basar, R. DeCarlo, N.H.
McClamroch, M. Spong, and S. Yurkovich.
Report on the nsfcss workshop on new
ddirections in control engineering_education.
IEEE Control Systems Magazine, 19(5)53-58,
October 1999.
4 M. de Magistris. A matlab-based virtual
laboratory for teaching in-troductory quasistationary
electromagnetics.
IEEE
Transactionson Education, 48(1)81-88, 2005.
5 C.C. Ko, B.M. Chen, S. Hu, V. Ramakrishnan,
C.D. Cheng,Y. Zhuang, and J. Chen. A webbased virtual laboratory on afrequency
modulation experiment. IEEE Transactions
Systems and Cybernetics, Part C Applications
and Reviews, 31(3) 295-303, 2001.
6 R.M. Murray, K. Astrm, S.P. Boyd, R.W.
Brockett, and G. Stein. Future didrections in
control in an information-rich world. IEEE
Control Systems Magazine, 23(2)20-33, April
2003.
7 Peter Dorato, A Survey of Control Systems
Education in the United States, IEEE
Transactions on Education. Vol. 33, No. 3.
August 1990
8

R. Y. Chiang and M. G. Safonov, RobustControl Toolbox. South Natrck, MA The
Mathworks, 1988

9

K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ Prentice-Hall, 1970.

10 Apples Home Page, www.apple.com  Last
Access 03-13-2012

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Laboratory of Automation, Control and Instrumentation for the help in
promoting the application.
References
1 Dennis S. Bernstein, Enhancing Undergraduate
Control Education, IEEE Control Systems,
October 1999, pp 40  43

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

4331