ORIENTATION OF RIGID OBJECTS USING A MOBILE ROBOT
Bruno C. O. Dutra, Guilherme A. S. Pereira


Departamento de Engenharia Eletrica, Escola de Engenharia,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brasil
Emails brunocodutra@gmail.com, gpereira@ufmg.br
Resumo Este artigo apresenta uma nova solucao para o problema de orientacao de objetos com um robo
movel. A metodologia e baseada em campos_vetorias artificiais e nao requer um conhecimento explcito da
geometria do objeto, sendo aplicavel tanto para objetos convexos como para os nao convexos. O metodo pode ser
facilmente integrado a tecnicas de transporte para permitir a manipulacao completa do objeto. Apesar da prova
de convergencia da metodologia assumir robos holonomicos e pontuais, experimentos com robos_nao-holonomicos
circulares mostram sua aplicacao para robos_moveis reais.
Palavras-chave

.

Abstract This paper presents a novel solution for object orientation by a single mobile robot. The methodology is based on artificial vector fields and does not require an explicit knowledge of the object geometry, being
applicable for both convex and non-convex objects and may be easily combined with known transportation
to allow for complete manipulation approaches. Although the convergence proof of the methodology assume
point holonomic robots, experiments with circular non-holonomic robots show its applicability for actual mobile
robots.
Keywords

1

mobile robots, manipulation, orientation.

Introduction

only address the problem of object transportation
(but not orientation) (Sudsang and Ponce, 2000
Pereira et al., 2004 Fink et al., 2008), are potentially more robust and easier to be decentralized
for multiple robots than, for example, approaches
relying on force closure (Sugar and Kumar, 1998),
which consider the object precise orientation as a
basic problem.
This paper presents a novell and simple
method for object orientation with a single plannar mobile robot. The authors believe that this
methotod may be used in the future, together
with published transportation algorithms, to compose a complete (transportation+orientation) object manipulation approach.
Following the idea of simplicity and robustness of some transportation methods based on object closure (Pereira et al., 2004 Fink et al., 2008),
the proposed approach is based on artificial vector
fields. The method was also strongly inspired by
other vector field methods for robot control (Hsieh
et al., 2007 Fink et al., 2008 Goncalves et al.,
2009), where the resulting manipulating field is a
convex composition of an attracting and a curling vector field used to induce a limit cicle at
the robot configuration space. In the present approach, however, the attracting field tries to impose contact between the robot and the object
while the curling one is responsible for turning the
object around its center of mass.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents a formal definition for the manipulation
problem we are dealing with. In Section 3 is presented the vector field based orientation methodology proposed in this work. A physical interpretation for the method is given in Section 4. Sec-

Several works in the literature have studied the
problem of object manipulation using mobile
robots. Most approaches use the notions of force,
form, and object closure to perform the manipulation of relatively large objects (Rus, 1997 Sugar
and Kumar, 1998 Chaimowicz et al., 2001 Pereira
et al., 2004 Fink et al., 2008).
Force closure is a condition which implies that
the grasp must resist to any external force applied
to the object. When this condition is achieved
without requiring the contacts to be frictional a
form closure situation is in place. In general,
robots or fingers are the agents that induce contact with the object, and are the only source
of grasping forces. When external forces, such
as gravity and friction, are used together with
the contact forces to produce the force closure
condition, we have a situation called conditional
force closure. Several research groups have used
this situation to transport an object by pushing it from an initial position to a goal (Mataric
et al., 1995 Lynch, 1996).
Object closure requires the less stringent condition that the object is simply trapped or caged
by the robots. The robots surround the object
but not necessarily touch or press it, so, although
it may have some freedom to move, it cannot escape the closure (Davidson and Blake, 1998 Wang
and Kumar, 2002 Pereira et al., 2004).
Caging and pushing operations require a relatively low degree of precision regarding the position and orientation of the object. Therefore, manipulation strategies based on conditional
form closure and object closure, which usually

20

tions 5 and 6 present, respectively, simulation and
experimental results. While we assume a holonomic point robot in our convergence proofs, the
proposed methodology was experimentally evaluated with a circular non-holonomic robot running
a feedback linearization control technique to track
the vector field. The robot oriented a relatively
large, rectangular box. Finally, conclusions and
proposals of continuity are presented in Section 7.
2

where A(qo , qr , S) is a 3  2 matrix.
A5  The center of mass of the object, described
by co  xo , yo T , must be inside its perimeter, denoted by the parametric vectorial function B(k)  R 7 R2 , right-handed orientated.
Assumption A1 makes it easier to explain the
basic methodology. It may be relaxed by considering a point at the perimeter of an actual robot
as a point robot, although this is not discussed in
this paper.
Assumption A2 is a strong one, but may be
practically overcome with efficient low level controllers, as we will show in the experiments section.
Assumption A3 is introduced to make the
methodology the less restrictive as possible, because once we do not assume any knowledge about
the materials the robot and the object are made,
we may not assume the robot will remain fixed on
the objects border.
Assumption A4 is quite real if the friction between the object and the workspace surface is sufficient large to supress any manifestation of inertia, which means the object will not slide in the
absence of resultant external of forces.
Assumption A5 must hold because we consider an attractive vector field that drives the
robot to the objects center of mass and we assume
that this field will always make the robot collide
with the object. Clearly, it may not happen when
the center of mass is outside the perimeter of the
object. Notice that this is the only assumption
relative to the object geometry or mass distribution. We do not assume any knowledge about the
object shape, characteristic that is very important
for most manipulation methodologies.

Problem Definition

In this paper we assume the presence of a global
reference frame G represented by the orthonormal coordinates x, y, and z. However, we only
consider a planar world W  R2 , which we assume, without loss of generality, to be the z  0
plane. The world is populated by a single robot
R and a rigid movable object O. The robot is
described by the set R(qr )  R2 where qr 
xr , yr , r T is its configuration vector. Likewise,
the object is described by the set O(qo )  R2 ,
where qo  xo , yo , o T denotes its configuration.
The angles r and o are the orientations of the
robot and the object respectively, which represent
counterclockwise rotations of R(qr ) and O(qo )
around the z axis in respect to x axis.
The problem we are dealing with in this work
is given by
Problem 1 Control the robot R to interact with
the object O so that o converges to the desired
object orientation s .
Before we proceed with the proposed solution
to the previous problem we will make some assumptions
A1  The robot is a point. Consequently, r is
not defined and we may redefine its configuration as qr  xr , yr T . Moreover, R(qr ) 
qr .

3

In this paper we develop a vector field methodology to address the problem presented in the previous section. We start with a definition of functions.

A2  The robot is modeled as fully actuated holonomic robot
qr  u ,
(1)
where u is the system control input.
A3  The contact between the robot and the object is modeled by a slip property S  R,
0  S < 1 dependent on the material that
both are made. When robot and object are
in contact, if we assume that qT is the component of the robot velocity tangent to the
object, (1  S)qT would be the part of qT
that contributes to the object angular velocity.

Definition 1 We define three types of functions
 (qr  co )  R2 7 R a positive definite function with bounded second order partial derivatives. Furthermore, when it is written in polar coordinates (, ), its derivative along 
vanishes everywhere.
 H(s  o )  R 7 R a continuous function
that vanishes only at the origin, where it has
positive derivative.

A4  The object is also modeled as a simple integrator and the evolution of its configuration
is related to the robots velocity as
qo  A(qo , qr , S)qr ,

Methodology

 G(s  o )  R 7 R a continuous positive
definite function.

(2)

21

8

Z

6
4
2
0
2

Figure 2 Geometry of the system.
1

0

Y

1

2 2

1

1

0

2

If we substitute the values of N and T given by
Theorem 1 in these equations we have

X

Figure 1 Example of function .

e  G kk sin()  H kk cos() n
b,
N
e
b
T  G kk cos() + H kk sin() t .

One may notice that function  is geometrically centered at the center of mass of the object,
so that  always points to co . This is an important property that we will use to attract the
robot to the object. Also, all level sets of  are
circles, due to the fact that its derivative along 
is always null. An example of  is shown in the
Figure 1. Function H clearly has the same signal
of its argument, since it is continuous and crosses
the origin with positive derivative.
Now the control law can be presented by the
following theorem

(5)

e is
It is important to say that only (1  S)T
transmitted to the object according to Assumption A3. The remainder is the slip velocity of the
robot in respect to the objects surface.
e
If the robot is in contact to the object, then N
must be positive, i.e. pointing towards the object.
This happens only inside the interval given by
 
 
H
H
<  < tan1
+  , (6)
tan1
G
G
where tan1 ()   2 , 2 .
The objects angular velocity is given, by the
following equation, easily deduced from Figure 2
and equations (4) and (5), for   0, 2.

kkH(H sin2 ()+0.5 G sin(2))S 


kqr co k
(7)
o 
if (6) holds.


0,
otherwise.

Theorem 1 If the control law to the system described by equations (1) and (2) is given by
u  N + T,

(4)

(3)

where
N  G(s  o )(qr  co ) ,
T  H(s  o )z  (qr  co ) ,

The discontinuities in this equation are a consequence of Assumption A4.
Notice that we have not considered any friction component between the object and the floor
in the above equation. Since it is assumed that
the robot follows exactly the velocity imposed by
its control law, for the object orientation this is
not an issue. The friction may, however, imply
a resultant linear velocity on the object. Hence,
obtaining an equation that represent the objects
linear velocity is a lot harder task. This does not
represent any problem to our proposal, however,
since we will not treat the translation of the object
and, therefore, such an equation is not needed.
We now present a theorem, on which the proof
of Theorem 1 will be based. It constitutes one of
the main results of Bacciotti and Ceragioli (1999),
based on the method by Filippov (1960).

then o will asymptotically converge to the set
point s .
Before providing the proof for Theorem 1, let
us make another definition based on the geometry of the physical system illustrated by Figure 2,
where the arbitrary closed curve represents the
perimeter of the object.
Definition 2 Assume the robot is in contact to
the object at point P  B(kP ). Then, we will introduce a new vectorial base t paralell to dB
dk (kP )
2
and n paralell to ddkB2 (kP ). Also, we will denote
t.
by  the clockwards angle between N and b
According to Definition 2, we obtain the vece and T,
e which are composed by the projectors N
b and b
tions of N and T uppon n
t as

Theorem 2 (Extended Lyapunov Theorem)
Let F(x) be a set-valued function, upper semicontinuous, with nonempty, compact and convex
values x  Rn and consider the following
differential inclusion

e  N  n
b+Tn
bn
b,
N
e  N b
T
t + T b
t b
t.

x  F (x) .

22

(8)

If there exist a function V  Rn 7 R, positive
definite, locally Lipschitz continuous and regular
function, such that


 


sin(2)
S

 H sin2 () + G 2
(H + 0.5 G) S  (H + 0.5 G) S, then it is
sufficient that

V (x)  a  R  v  F (x) 
p  v  a p  V (x)  0,

H  (H + 0.5 G) S ,

But

(9)

and therefore

where V (x) is the Clarke generalized gradient of
V(x), then the above differential inclusion is stable
at x  0.

1
1+

Let us now proceed with the proof of the Theorem 1.

G
2H

S.

(11)

The above condition guarantees that the setpoint s is stable. Now we will show that it is also
asymptoticaly stable.
The system as a whole is autonomous and has
five state variables, namely xr , yr , xo , yo , and
o . It has only one equilibrium point, given by
o  s , since even when the robot is not in contact to the object and xo , yo and o vanish, the
robot never stops, unless the object is properly orientated. Recall that Assumption A5 forbids the
robot to reach co . This way o must approach s
when time increases.
2

Proof of Theorem 1 The only variable state
that in fact interests us is o , so we will focus on
its respective equation, given by (7).
To use Lemma 2, we will rewrite this differential equation as a differential inclusion.
 

kkH(H sin2 ()+0.5 G sin(2))S 


,

kqr co k




 holds
if (6)
o  F 
coA,

if   tan1 H

G

 ,


tan1 H


G + 

0,
otherwise
(10)
where co
 is the convex hull operator and A is the
set given below.
 i
h


 kk H  H sin2 () + G sin(2)
S 
2
A  0,


kqr  co k

4

Physical Interpretation

In the previous section we have presented the
methodology and the mathematical proof required. In this section we will briefly discuss the
physical meaning for the theory presented.
First assume that object and robot are in contact at point P  B(k) and that there is no slip
between the robot and the object, hence, S  0.
According to Theorem 1 the robot follows a velocity component, called N, towards the center of
mass of the object and another component, called
T, orthogonal to the last one. Since N is pointing
in the direction of the center of mass, it will not
produce angular velocities to the object, instead,
it will contribute only to its translation. On the
other hand, since T is orthogonal to N, it will
induce angular velocities and, possibly, linear velocities due to the friction between the object and
the floor. Such a result can be obtained by Equation (7) when we assume S  0

It is shown by Filippov (1960) that such way
to extend the discontinuous right-hand side always
generates upper semi-continuous set-valued maps,
with nonempty, compact and convex values.
Consider now the following Lyapunov Function candidate, in the sence of Theorem 2, for the
system described by equations (1), (2) and (3)
V  (s  o )2 .
By construction, V is positive definite, locally
Lipschitz continuous and regular. According to
Equation (9), we obtain the following
V  2(s  o )F .

o 

If V  0 everywhere, then the origin, i.e.
s  o , is a stable point. Notice then, that it
is necessary and sufficient to satisfy the following
condition, which is already simplified.
 


sin(2)
2
S  0.
(s o ) H  H sin () + G
2

kTk
H kk

.
kqr  co k
kqr  co k

Now assume that the robot may slip in respect
to the surface of the object, hence S  0, 1). Notice that is still possible for the robot to be statione vanishes
ary in respect to the object, as long as T
for a  inside the interval given by Equation (6).
That happens precisely when
 
G
1
,
   tan
H

Here (s  o )H is always positive, recalling
the property of H presented by Definition 1, then
it is sufficient to show that

 


sin(2)
2

S  .
H   H sin () + G
2

where, in this case, tan1 ()  0, .

23

ure 4, at left, show the object angle o in respect
to iteration steps as a full line, while the setpoint
s is shown as a dotted line. It is clear that
the system converged asymptotically. In the right
hand side of the same figure, it is shown the evolution of the Lyapunov function V . As expected,
it tends to zero as time increases. Notice that in
both graphs of Figure 4 there are small time intervals at the beginning of the simulation where
the variables do not change. During such time intervals the robot was not in contact to the object.
Just before each of these time intervals, the robot
slipped along the object surface, orienting it, but
then it lost contact. Finally, due to the shape of
the object, the robot reached a point where it got
stuck, as described in the previous section, until
the end of the simulation. This behavior can also
be inferred from Figure 3.

1

y(m)

1

1

0
1

2

2

2

3

3
3

2

1

x(m)

0

1

2

Figure 3 Simulation results A point robot (path
in dashed line) orienting a polygonal object, which
is plotted in three different positions.

120

5

100

4

80

V(k)

o

 (deg)

140

60

6

Until now we have considered that assumptions A1 and A2 always hold. However, in this
section we directly apply the methodology to control an actual non-holonomic robot. Although it is
necessary more work to mathematically show that
the methodology can be extended to such kind of
robot, the experimental results in this section are
very promising.
We have implemented the methodology to
control an iRobots Create mobile robot. This is
a circular differential drive robot, whose diameter is 0.33m, that, in our case, is equipped with a
Linux laptop and is localized by an external visual
system based on the ARToolkitPlus Tracking Library. All the software used the Player platform.
The object is a rectangular cardboard box that
is also localized by he visual system. Remember
that the proposed methodology relies on the object position and orientation.
To control the Create robot to follow the vector field in Equation (3), we relied on the robots
on board velocity control system and used a
kinematic, static feedback linearization controller
that, basically, translates the field components to
the robots linear and angular velocities v and 
as (Pereira, 2003)

  
cos r sin r
v
u,
(12)


 sindr cosdr

2
40

1
20
0
0

200

400

Iteration step

600

0
0

200

400

600

Iteration step

Figure 4 Evolution of the object orientation (left)
and system energy (right) fo the simulation in Figure 3. That dotted line in the left figure is the
desired orientation.
So, if the perimeter of the object is such that
for at least one point the previous condition holds,
the robot may eventually remain fixed to this
point during the movement. On the other hand,
if no point belonging to the perimeter of the object satisfies the previous condition, then the robot
will keep circulating along B, loosing contact on
points such that  is outside the interval given by
Equation (6). In both cases the setpoint is always
reached as demonstrated.
5

Experimental Evaluation

3

Simulations

Extensive simulations have been made using
the free, open source softwares from the Player
Project (Gerkey et al., 2003). Results obtained
with a point holonomic robot orientating an arbitrary object can be seen on the figures 3
and 4. Such simulation was performed using
Gazebo (Collett and MacDonald, 2006), a 3D
simulator part of the Player Project, which uses
the ODE library for dynamic model computation.
Gazebo applies a second order model for every
body it simulates, then, to assure Assumption A4,
a very light object compared to the robot and a
fairly high friction were used.
Figure 3 shows snapshots which represents the
simulation. The sequence of numbers from 1 to 3
represents the way the system has evolved. Fig-

where d > 0 defines a control point located at a
small distance from the robot center of mass. In
this paper 0 < d  0.165m, so that the virtual
control point is always inside the perimeter of the
robot.
Figure 5 shows a plot that represents the experiment. Again, the sequence of numbers from 1
to 3 gives the sequence of the snapshots. The left
hand side of Figure 6 shows the evolution of o in
respect to the number of iterations as a full line,

24

0.5

8

1

This work is supported by FAPEMIG (Fundacao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Gerais). The authors hold scholarships from
CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento
Cientfico e Tecnologico).

y(m)

0
3

1
0.5

Acknowledgments

2
2

References

3

1
0.5

1

1.5

Bacciotti, A. and Ceragioli, F. (1999). Stability and stabilization of discontinuous systems
and nonsmooth lyapunov functions, ESAIM
Control, Optimisation and Calculus of Variations 4 361376.

2

x(m)
Figure 5 Experimental data Circular robot path
(dashed line) and object path (solid line) overlaid
by three instants of the experiments represented
by plots of the object (rectangle) and robot.

Chaimowicz, L., Sugar, T., Kumar, V. and Campos, M. F. M. (2001). An architecture
for tightly-coupled multi-robot cooperation,
Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics Automation, pp. 22922297.

6
0

5

V(k)

o (deg)

4
50

Collett, T. H. J. and MacDonald, B. A. (2006).
Augmented reality visualisation for Player,
Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics Automation, pp. 39543959.

3
2

100

1
150

0
20

40

60

80

100

120

20

Iteration step

40

60

80

100

120

Iteration step

Davidson, C. and Blake, A. (1998). Caging planar objects with a three-finger one-parameter
gripper, Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics
Automation, pp. 27222727.

Figure 6 Object orientation (left) and energy
(right) obtained from the experiment in Figure 5.

Filippov, A. F. (1960). Differential equations
with discontinuous right-hand side, Mat. Sb.
(N.S.) 51(93) 99128.

while the setpoint s is shown as a dotted line.
The system converged asymptotically in spite of
some pose estimation noise. Also, in Figure 6 it is
possible to see the evolution of the Lyapunov function V . Movies with this and other experiments
are available at httpcoro.cpdee.ufmg.br.

7

Fink, J., Hsieh, M. A. and Kumar, V. (2008).
Multi-robot manipulation via caging in environments with obstacles, Proc. IEEE Intl.
Conf. on Robotics Automation, pp. 1471
1476.

Conclusions

Gerkey, B., Vaughan, R. T. and Howard, A.
(2003). The playerstage project Tools for
multi-robot and distributed sensor systems,
Proc. Intl. Conf. on Advanced Robotics,
pp. 317323.

This paper presented a simple and provable correct vector field based methodology for object orientation using mobile robots. The methodology
does not depend on the object shape and only relies on the robots ability to estimate the position
and orientation of the object during the execution of the task. Experiments with a circular nonholonomic robot ilustrate the methodology for real
world robots.
The proposed method does not control the object position but, at first, it can be combined with
known methodologies to compose a complete manipulation strategy. This extension, along with
the inclusion of other robots to increase the efficiency of the orientation task is left as a future
work. Future work also include the extension of
the methodology to non-point and non-holonomic
robots.

Goncalves, V. M., Pimenta, L. C. A., Maia, C. A.
and Pereira, G. A. S. (2009). Artificial vector fields for robot convergence and circulation of time-varying curves in n-dimensional
spaces, Proc. American Control Conference,
pp. 20122017.
Hsieh, M. A., Loizou, S. and Kumar, V. (2007).
Stabilization of multiple robots on stable orbits via local sensing, Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf.
on Robotics Automation, pp. 23122317.
Lynch, K. M. (1996). Stable pushing Mechanics,
controllability, and planning, International
Journal of Robotics Research 15(6) 533556.

25

Mataric, M., Nilsson, M. and Simsarian, K.
(1995).
Cooperative multi-robot boxpushing, Proc. IEEERSJ Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 556561.
Pereira, G. A. S. (2003). Motion Planning and
Control of Cooperating Mobile Robots A
Graph Connectivity Approach, PhD thesis,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais.
Pereira, G. A. S., Kumar, V. and Campos,
M. F. M. (2004). Decentralized algorithms
for multi-robot manipulation via caging,
International Journal of Robotics Research
23(7) 783795.
Rus, D. (1997). Coordinated manipulation of objects in a plane, Algorithmica 19(12) 129
147.
Sudsang, A. and Ponce, J. (2000). A new approach
to motion planning for disc-shaped robots
manipulating a polygonal object in the plane,
Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics Automation, pp. 10681075.
Sugar, T. and Kumar, V. (1998). Decentralized
control of cooperating mobile manipulators,
Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics Automation, pp. 29162921.
Wang, Z. and Kumar, V. (2002). Object closure and manipulation by multiple cooperative mobile robots, Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf.
on Robotics Automation, pp. 394399.

26