Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

SMART APPLIANCES ENERGY MANAGEMENT THROUGH THE USE OF AN
EXTENSIBLE PLATFORM
Lucas Torri, Murilo Larroza Fonseca, Vitor Guimaraes, Marcelo Gotz, Carlos
Eduardo Pereira


Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Av. Osvaldo Aranha, 103, CEP 90035-190 - Porto
Alegre, RS, Brasil
Emails lucastorri@gmail.com, murilofonseca@gmail.com, vvmguimaraes@gmail.com,
mgoetz@ece.ufrgs.br, cpereira@ece.ufrgs.br
Abstract Smart Appliances refer to a modernization of appliances and their energy use, so they are able
to monitor, protect and automatically adjust its operation to the owners needs and energy availability. This
paper presents an extensible micro-metering platform that enables the creation of Smart Appliances, enabling the
creators of such devices to rely on it and focus on its features instead of the underneath requirements necessary
to build them. The features of the platform and its implementation are discussed along this paper, together with
examples that shows its operation.
Keywords

Advanced Metering Infrastructure, Micro-metering, Smart Appliances, Smart Grid.

Resumo Dentro do contexto de Redes Inteligen, eletrodomesticos inteligen sao uma modernizacao dos
aparelhos eletrodomesticos quanto a sua utilizacao de energia, de forma que es sejam capazes de monitorar,
proteger e ajustar automaticamente o seu funcionamento as necessidades do proprietario e a disponibilidade deste
recurso. Este trabalho apresenta uma plataforma de micro-medicao extensvel que permite a criacao de aparelhos
eletrodomesticos inteligen, permitindo que os criadores de tais dispositivos que confiar nele e se concentrar em
suas caractersticas em vez do baixo requisitos necessarios para constru-los. Os recursos da plataforma e sua
implementacao sao discutidas ao longo deste artigo, juntamente com exemplos que mostram o seu funcionamento
Palavras-chave
.

1

Infraestrutura Avancada de Medicao, Micro-Medicao, Smart Appliances, Redes Inteligen-

Introduction

Improvements in the areas of computing, embedded electronics, and other technologies employed
in sensors and actuators assembly, are enabling
the creation of a modern automated and distributed power grid. This grid, known as Smart
Grid, enhances several factors of the current power
network, bringing new perspectives in electricity management, operation, generation, transmission and distribution (Massoud Amin and Wollenberg, 2005). Together, they can result in increased
efficiency, transmission safety and reliability, besides elimination of large-scale integration obstacles of renewable and distributed energy sources.
This new paradigm also features a bi-directional
electricity and information flow, enabling an automated and distributed energy network that incorpora the grid benefits of distributed computing
and communications to provide real-time information and allowing almost instantaneous supply
and demand balance of energy goods.
Within the context of Smart Grids, lies
the concept of Advanced Metering Infrastructure
(AMI) (Cleveland, 2008). This is the slice of
the grid responsible for managing and collecting information around energy usage and to enable the iteration between end users, their households, and the power utilities. Some very important components of the AMI are the Smart Appliances (Stragier et al., 2010). Those are extensions of regular appliances, with added intelligence

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

and self-awareness energy usage capacities, so that
they can monitor, protect and automatically adjust its operation according to the owners needs
and power availability. This means that they are
not only capable to provide features like remote
switched onoff or adjust their functionality to
user desires, but also to use information available
on the Smart Grid to adapt its running behavior
to accomplish those tasks in an energy wise manner.
The Research  Consulting firm ZPryme
showed that between the years of 2011 and 2015,
Smart Appliances is estimated to grown from
a 3.06 billion to a 15.12 billion dollars market (Zpryme, 2010). In the other hand, there is
no common platform or set of standards defined
to enable the creation of such devices. Noticeably,
there is a lack standards or of a platform flexible enough to be adapted to different devices and
needs and provide interoperability between different appliance and vendors (AHAM, 2009).
This paper presents and discusses the necessary requirements to implement such a platform and introduces the implementation of a fullfledged solution that aims to be the base where
different appliances features can be implemented
on top of, so that Smart Appliances can be
built. It also demonstra how that is possible
through different applications created with the implemented platform.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 describes the related work. Section 3

4399

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

describes some requirements that devices need to
become Smart Appliances. Section 4 presents an
implementation of a platform that enables devices
to become Smart Appliances. Section 5 describes
some experiments with such platform. Finally,
Section 6 presents some conclusions and future
work.

2

Related Work

In the literature, several works discussing analysis
and management of appliances energy usage have
been proposed. A platform for power management
policies is proposed in (Shailendra et al., 2011).
Power Line Communication and a MasterSlave
communication model are combined with a priorities system, where appliances with lowest priority
are switched off first in the case of a power outage.
(Asad et al., 2011) uses a Wireless Sensor Network
(WSN) mounted on the appliances to monitor energy usage. Those are able to run web_services
and a web server retrieves data from the appliances services to notify users.
In (Barbato et al., 2011), a system for predicting usage of household appliances is presented. It
is based on a WSN as well, with nodes attached
to each household appliance and using the data
provided by them to forecast devices activities for
the next day.
The design and implementation of an energy management system is also presented in (Lee
et al., 2009). It uses motion detection and users
location to detect a living pattern in the house to
efficiently reduce power consumption, taking into
account user habits to control devices.
The work presented by (Tompros et al., 2008)
shows an architecture that seeks house energy savings. The main part of the architecture is provided by an optimized residential gateway that
allows the user to set thresholds and custom programming energy consumption of household appliances, allowing them to rationalize consumption
levels. In the other end energy monitoring devices
provide interconnection between the gateway and
the home network devices.
The project shown in (Erol-Kantarci and
Mouftah, 2011) evalua the performance of an
in-home energy management energy application,
where expenses are cut by scheduling the appliances in appropriate time-slots, which have varying prices for electricity.
Due to the close relation with the subject,
home and industrial automation projects are also
important, since they discuss devices communication and interoperability. An UPnP(Universal
Plug-and-Play)-based Home Automation Platform is proposed in (Zao et al., 2007), where new
appliances can be introduced incrementally into
the environment and work with one another. To

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

accomplish that, each device provides their description and individual service descriptions.
A similar work is introduced by (Ishikawa
et al., 2004), which present a smart appliance integration system using OSGi component framework. The work reveals several problems experienced with the framework.
SOCRADES, described in (Cannata et al.,
2008), focus in the use of Service Oriented Architectures (SOA) for both platform and applications in industrial automation systems using the
Devices Profile for Web Services (DPWS) specification. Similarly to UPnP, DPWS aims to define
implementation constraints that enable seamless
integration of device-provided services.
3

Requirements and Technologies

In order to enable an ordinary device to become
a Smart Appliance, some requirements are clearly
necessary. First of all, the hardware that allows
intelligence to be built-in. Secondly, the ability to
communicate with the rest of the Smart network,
mainly other devices inside the AMI. Then, information about the energy consumed by the domestic environment and the appliances participation
in the share, bringing energy consumption selfawareness to it.
An interesting point to be considered in the
creation of a system is the reuse ability of functional blocks, like demonstrated by (C.Y. Baldwin, n.d.). The authors show the advantages of
using modular systems, where design elements are
divided and assigned to modules that are integrated according to a formal architecture or plan.
These advantages are ones such as the ability to
foster innovation and introduce new options in a
market
Furthermore, the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers (AHAM) points out the need
of an open exchange of information and standardized protocols that enable the creation of Smart
Appliances (AHAM, 2009).
With these characteristics in mind, the following properties were elected as necessary to the
proposed Smart Appliance platform
 base hardware and software libraries that enables application development
 micro-metering mechanism, providing fundamental information about the device, like
power and energy consumption
 communication between different devices
within a communication network
 ability to reuse functional blocks that allow
you to extend the functionality of the platform

4400

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

 communication and cooperation capabilities
between these functional blocks and ability to
the functionality of a platform to be utilized
in other network devices
 announcement within the home network of
the functionalities provided by each device.
The following subsections discuss the technologies to provide these characteristics.
3.1

Networking

According to many authors, the architecture of
the Smart Grid will be similar to the Internet
a flexible framework formed by the combination
of different systems, allowing maximum flexibility
during execution (NIST, 2010), (Tsoukalas and
Gao, 2008). There is a great expectation that
the Internet Protocol (IP) will serve as a key element in the information networks of the Smart
Grid. Among its benefits are the maturity and
availability of tools and applications, the already
widespread use of IP technology in private networks and public, and the ability to allow applications to be developed independently of the infrastructure of communication. Another quality of
IP is its capacity to be adapted to different physical layers, like cable, twisted-pair or fiber optics,
through the use of the IEEE 802.3 standard, or
wireless, with the aid of the IEEE 802.11 standard.
The dominant version of IP is the number 4
(IPv4), but version 6 (IPv6) usage has been growing over the last few years. One of the main reasons is the limited amount of possible addresses
that IPv4 offers, which are running out worldwide,
while IPv6 enables a massive increase of those.
Also, features like multicasting and network-layer
security are now part of the base specification, and
not optional like in IPv4.
3.2

Modules and Services

Different appliances posse different functionalities,
that need to be offered to other devices on the network. To expose the functionalities of a device on
the communication network the concept of service
is used, where another device is able to interact
and use functionalities of that one through those
services. According to W3C (World Wide Web
Consortium), A Web service is a software system
designed to support machine-to-machine interaction over a network (W3C, 2004).
(Mulligan and Gracanin, 2009) and (Yazar
and Dunkels, 2009) implemented an application
using REST (Representational State Transfer)
and SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) web
service. The results of the first paper points
that the REST implementation was more efficient
both in terms of bandwidth and latency, producing much better results when the component was

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

ted in different specific domain scenarios. The
second paper shows a smaller memory footprint,
as well as a lower total amount of code necessary
to implement the REST system.
The software libraries necessary to one or
more services, together with the hardware necessary to provide those, are called a module. According to this project, a module is the set of
hardware and software necessary to implement the
functionality of its exposed services, keeping in
mind the presence of those resources already provided by the platform.
3.3

Services Look-up and Discovery

The devices must find each other to use their services and to operate together in the AMI. A protocol specific for the platform was created in this
project. It will be discussed on the following sections.
3.4

Micro-Metering Modules

Smart Appliances must be aware of their energy
consumption to adjust its operation. In order to
provide the micro-metering capabilities, a module
was created and introduced to the platform. It
contains the hardware necessary to collect the devices current and voltage information and logic
to expose these data as services.
4

Implementation

The final platform architecture is presented in
Figure 1. The middle layer contains the Sun
SPOT hardware and the Squawk JVM (Java Virtual Machine), providing the HWSW (HardwareSoftware) interface. Given the availability
and possibility of using a higher level language
that helps driving code reuse through Object Orientation, the Sun SPOT platform was selected as
the base Hardware and Software layer. It provides
an ARM processor, with IO capabilities and A
IEEE 802.15.4 radio layer, where the 6LoWPAN
(IPv6 over Low power Wireless Personal Area
Network) protocol (Dorge and Scheffler, 2011)
was employed, which allows the use of the lat version of the IP protocol (IPv6) in embedded
devices. Even though the experiments used IEEE
802.15.4 as the network, IEEE 802.11 or 802.3 are
also possible since the communication is based on
the IP stack protocol
The bottom layer contains hardware specific
to the application and modules used on the device,
for instance, the hardware necessary to collect current and voltage of the appliance which the platform is embedded by the micro-metering module.
The added hardware can be accessed through the
Sun SPOT IO (InputOutput) libraries and the
proper usage is made on module level.

4401

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

All modules have, automatically, an REST
API (Application Programming Interface) exposed to the network over the HTTP protocol,
where other devices can get information about it
or even change its settings. Besides that, each
module service can provide their own specific
REST API in order to expose its features to the
network. The API can be accessed both externally, by other device, or other modulesservices
inside the same appliance. Table 1 shows the exposed services of the micro-metering module.

(a) Service look-up protocol joining mode.

(b) Service look-up protocol searching mode.

Figure 2
modes.

Figure 1 Platform Arquitecture.

Table 1 REST API of the exposed services in the
micro-metering module.
URL

HTTP Returns...
Method

micro-metering
powerpresent
micro-metering
energypresent

GET

micro-metering
voltagepresent
micro-metering
currentpresent
micro-metering
statusall

GET

GET

GET
GET

...the present
power
...the
total
energy
consumed
to
date
...the present
voltage
...the present
current
...all
data
above in a
XML
document

Modules and their respective services are
created using the abstractions provided by the
Platforms Java API. Besides these common
abstractions, the Platform library provides an

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Service look-up protocol operation

HTTP(Hypertext Transfer Protocol) server and
client, to respectively provide and access services,
a library to abstract HTTP messages and handling of those on the Java application, and the
implementation of the service look-up protocol.
The service look-up protocol was created specific for the platform. A quick overview of how it
works is presented in Figure 2. It shares and discovers services on the network. Once a service is
registered in the platform and the devices joins the
network, a multicast message is sent (NOTIFY
message). With that, all the other devices interested in using such a service are now notified of
its presence, enabling them to access it. Optionally, a device can, at any moment, send a message to the network searching for a specific service (M-SEARCH message). Once that message
reaches another device using the platform, it automatically replies the requester with the information related to the searched service (OK message).
The NOTIFY and OK messages send the Unique
Service Number (USN) of a service. The USN
contains all information necessary to enable the
service to be accessed by other device, like IP address of the host, module that implements it, the
service protocol and its name. The USN follows
this structure
 USN
<IPv6
address><module
name><service protocol><service name>
 Example 2001db885a3008a2e3707334
micrometeringhttppower
With that, the user is able to access the offered service. That happens through the specific

4402

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

protocol used by that service. For instance, in the
micro-metering module the power is accessed using the HTTP protocol, via a request using the
GET method.
There is not necessarily a central point for devices information sharing, creating a distributed
dynamic network architecture. An example of this
architecture can be seen on Figure 3.

This allows the remote monitoring of their consumption. It was also developed an Energy Management System (EMS), which runs on a computer and has the ability to find all platforms on
the network.
The main objective of EMS is to collect energy data from all platforms and organize it. So
that, users can analyze them and find opportunities to reduce their energy cost. Figure 5 shows
some energy data from a television set that was
collected during a t period. The EMS can display data from a single day, week or month from
all platforms that are on the network.

(a) Energy consumed.

Figure 3 Network Architecture.

5

Experiments

The platform developed with a micro-metering
module is presented in Figure 4. The micrometering module (at left) must be plugged into
an outlet and provide an entry for the connection of devices. It collects the devices current and
voltage information and provides this to the platform. It was built from a commercial device that
measure electrical parameters and shows them to
users. The platform (at right) was implemented
in a Sun SPOT embedded system.

(b) Voltage measurements.

(c) Current measurements.

(d) Power measurements.

Figure 5 Energy data.

Figure 4 Platform and micro-metering module.
Each device that needs to be a Smart Appliance must be connected to one of these platforms.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

In Brazil, with the introduction of AMI
through the replacement of the energy meters, a
Time-Of-Use (TOU) rate should be used for low
voltage consumers. Currently the rate for these
consumers is constant during all hours of the day.
In the TOU rate, the energy cost takes different
values at different periods of the day. The price

4403

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

in terms of periods is fixed and known by all in
advance. This will also need systems that enable
power management for consumers.
It was created a module that provides a control service to turn on and off the equipment connected to the platform. The EMS has been expanded, including an algorithm that allows the
control of equipments based on the period that
the user allows them to be on. For each platform
the user must configure the periods in which it
can provide energy for the operation of the equipment connected to it. The EMS monitors the time
and sends commands to allow or deny the use of
energy by every appliance individually.
Figure 6 presents the power required by a device configured to operate between 20 and 40 minu in the t period. Figure 7 presents the energy consumption of this equipment.

gent information system, which is able to uses the
collected information to coordinate the operation
of all Smart Appliances.
Using academic and industry input, basic features that a Smart Appliance must posses were
outlined. Different experiments were demonstrated made using this platform and how they
can be used to develop intelligent and networked
appliances to operate inside the Smart Grid.
As a continuation of this research, further
work has been planned already deeper integration with the appliance operating modes (like, for
instance, small changes of an air conditioner temperature to save energy) development of an algorithm for automatic power management, which
can automatically set the allowed time for operation based on the value ra, operations of
others equipments and users configurations consider security and cryptography aspects, that were
left aside in this implementation, considering only
that devices inside the home area network are allowed to be on it.
References

Figure 6 Power required by a device controlled.

AHAM (2009). Smart grid white paper The home
appliance industrys principles  requirements for achieving a widely accepted smart
grid. White Paper from Home Appliance
Manufacturers - AHAM httpwww.aham.
orghtaGetDocumentActioni44191.
Asad, O., Erol-Kantarci, M. and Mouftah, H.
(2011). Sensor network web_services for
demand-side energy management applications in the smart_grid, Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC),
2011 IEEE, pp. 1176 1180.

Figure 7 Energy consumed by a device controlled.

Barbato, A., Capone, A., Rodolfi, M. and Tagliaferri, D. (2011). Forecasting the usage of
household appliances through power meter
sensors for demand management in the smart
grid, Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 2011 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 404 409.

The EMS can also automatically turn off an
equipment when it exceeds a limit imposed by
the user, such as a certain amount of energy consumed, or even a specific financial value of energy. The system allows automatic shutdown of
all equipment through a single command too.

Cannata, A., Gerosa, M. and Taisch, M. (2008).
Socrades A framework for developing intelligent systems in manufacturing, Industrial
Engineering and Engineering Management,
2008. IEEM 2008. IEEE International Conference on, pp. 1904 1908.

6

Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper the basic requirements necessary to
build a Smart Appliance was discussed. Additionally, a platform implementation that enables the
construction of such devices was presented and described, as well as its integration with an intelli-

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Cleveland, F. (2008).
Cyber security issues
for advanced metering infrasttructure (ami),
Power and Energy Society General Meeting Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy
in the 21st Century, 2008 IEEE, pp. 1 5.
C.Y. Baldwin, K. C. (n.d.). The option value
of modularity in design. Harvard NOM

4404

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Research Paper - httpwww.people.hbs.
educbaldwinDR2DR1Option.pdf.
Dorge, B. and Scheffler, T. (2011).
Using
ipv6 and 6lowpan for home automation
networks, Consumer Electronics - Berlin
(ICCE-Berlin), 2011 IEEE International
Conference on, pp. 44 47.
Erol-Kantarci, M. and Mouftah, H. (2011). Wireless sensor networks for cost-efficient residential energy management in the smart_grid,
Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on 2(2) 314
325.
Ishikawa, H., Ogata, Y., Adachi, K. and Nakajima, T. (2004). Building smart appliance integration middleware on the osgi framework,
Object-Oriented Real-Time Distributed Computing, 2004. Proceedings. Seventh IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 139 146.
Lee, M., Uhm, Y., Kim, Y., Kim, G. and Park,
S. (2009). Intelligent power management device with middleware based living pattern
learning for power reduction, Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on 55(4) 2081
2089.
Massoud Amin, S. and Wollenberg, B. (2005). Toward a smart_grid power delivery for the 21st
century, Power and Energy Magazine, IEEE
3(5) 34  41.
Mulligan, G. and Gracanin, D. (2009). A comparison of soap and rest implementations
of a service based interaction independence
middleware framework, Simulation Conference (WSC), Proceedings of the 2009 Winter,
pp. 1423 1432.

Tompros, S., Mouratidis, N., Caragiozidis, M.,
Hrasnica, H. and Gavras, A. (2008). A pervasive network architecture featuring intelligent
energy management of households, Proceedings of the 1st international conference on
PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive
Environments, PETRA 08, pp. 751756.
Tsoukalas, L. and Gao, R. (2008). From smart
grids to an energy internet Assumptions, architectures and requirements, Electric Utility
Deregulation and Restructuring and Power
Technologies, 2008. DRPT 2008. Third International Conference on, pp. 94 98.
W3C
(2004).
Web
services
glossary.
httpwww.w3.orgTR2004
NOTE-ws-gloss-20040211.
Yazar, D. and Dunkels, A. (2009). Efficient
application integration in ip-based sensor
networks, Proceedings of the First ACM
Workshop on Embedded Sensing Systems for
Energy-Efficiency in Buildings, BuildSys 09,
ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 4348.
Zao, J., Liu, Y.-C., Yang, M.-H., Li, S.-K., Chen,
W.-Y., Chen, C.-W., Huang, K.-C., Hu, J.-S.
and Kuo, L.-C. (2007). Ubiquitous e-helpers
An upnp-based home automation platform,
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 2007. ISIC.
IEEE International Conference on, pp. 3682
3689.
Zpryme (2010). Smart grid insights Smart
appliances.
httpwww.zpryme.
comSmartGridInsights2010Smart
ApplianceReportZprymeSmartGrid
Insights.pdf.

NIST (2010).
Nist framework and roadmap
for smart_grid interoperability standards.
httpwww.nist.govpublic
affairsreleasesuploadsmartgrid
interoperabilityfinal.pdf.
Shailendra, B., Singh, S., Karande, O.,
Chaturvedi, S., Dhariwal, S. and Mohan, V. (2011). Architecture for smart_grid
based consumer end solution, Advanced
Communication Technology (ICACT), 2011
13th International Conference on, pp. 88
92.
Stragier, J., Hauttekeete, L. and De Marez, L.
(2010). Introducing smart_grids in residential
contexts Consumers perception of smart
household appliances, Innovative Technologies for an Efficient and Reliable Electricity Supply (CITRES), 2010 IEEE Conference
on, pp. 135 142.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

4405