XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

REAL-TIME WALKER-ASSISTED GAIT ANALYSIS SYSTEM USING WEARABLE INERTIAL
MEASUREMENT UNITS
ANDERSON S. ROSA, LAURA S. VARGAS, ANSELMO FRIZERA, TEODIANO BASTOS
Intelligent Automation Laboratory. Electrical Engineering Department. Federal University of Espirito Santo
Av. Fernando Ferrari, 514  Goiabeiras, CEP 29075-910, Vitoria, Brazil
E-mail sachetto@gmail.com

Abstract Results presented in the literature indicate that IMUs (Inertial Measurement Units) are an alternative to vision systems in the analysis of human gait, not limited on monitoring patients into specific laboratories with special equipment and high
cost. This work presents a study to address the viability of developing a real-time analysis tool for smart walker-assisted gait. The
system consist of a graphical interface to process user gait parameters in real-time helping physiotherapists to assess the current
state andor evolution of patients during the gait, allowing immediate intervention. The system is equipped with a module for offline data processing, in which the collected data can be stored enabling the quantitative monitoring of the rehabilitation process.
Initial results demonstrate the viability of developing a system that can provide support for clinical physiotherapists. Clinical parameters will be evaluated, which will be inserted into the system in near future.
Keywords Gait analysis, smart walker, IMUs, joint angles.
Resumo Resultados apresentados na literatura indicam que as IMUs (Inertial Measurement Units) são uma alternativa a sistemas de visão na analise da marcha humana, não limitando o monitoramento de pacientes a laboratórios específicos dotados de
equipamentos especiais e de custo elevado. Este trabalho apresenta um estudo de viabilidade para o desenvolvimento de uma ferramenta de análise, em tempo_real, da marcha assistida por um andador_robótico. O sistema conta com uma interface_gráfica que
recebe parâmetros da marcha do usuário, a fim de disponibilizá-los em tempo_real para que fisioterapeutas possam avaliar a situação eou evolução do paciente  medida que ele executa a marcha, possibilitando sua intervenção imediata. O sistema é dotado
de um módulo para processamento off-line dos dados, com o qual é possível armazenar os dados coletados e realizar o acompanhamento quantitativo do processo de reabilitação. Os resultados iniciais demonstram a viabilidade de se desenvolver um sistema
que possa dar apoio clínico aos fisioterapeutas. Os parâmetros clínicos serão avaliados e suas informações serão inseridas no sistema em um futuro próximo.
Palavras-chave .

1 Introduction
Aging, conditions at birth, accidents and disorders including Parkinsons disease, cerebral palsy,
stroke and spinal cord injury can alter biomechanical
features that define a healthy gait pattern (Tien et al.,
2010). In this context, clinical professionals and
researchers resort to the use of assistive devices for
the treatment and functional compensation of patients with gait impairments. Such devices can be
passive or active depending on their interaction with
the user. Examples include canes, crutches, manual
and autonomous wheelchairs, conventional and smart
walkers, prostheses and orthoses, and recently robotic exoskeletons. Considering its simplicity, walkers
represent an assistive device with great potential to
improve safe, efficient ambulation, balance and stability of patients (Frizera et al., 2012).
Conventionally, clinical assessment of patients
functional ability is subjective, based on experience
and descriptive information about movement patterns. Thus, there is a significant need to have quantitative information making the assessment objective
and precise. Moreover, the knowledge of kinematic
parameters, as a fundamental part of a complete
human gait analysis, helps to optimize rehabilitation
strategies (Frizera et al., 2012). In addition, this
quantitative information can be used to provide feedback for both physician and patient, in order to moni-

ISSN 2525-8311

tor the therapy evolution. Different researches about
gait rehabilitation have demonstrated that feedback
of gait performance takes an important role on motor
relearning and improve patients motivation (Lnenburger et al., 2007).
In gait analysis, optoelectronic systems based on
cameras are considered the gold standard. However,
these technologies present some limitations they are
expensive, present reduced portability, restrict the
study to a controlled laboratory environment and
require dedicated and experienced personnel. The
aforementioned characteristics may make difficult
the use of these systems in clinical routine and in
conditions where the patient is performing their activities of daily living. Moreover, systems based on
cameras are not a flexible and adaptable option to
applications involving walkers.
Alternatively, wearable sensor systems (WS),
such as Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs), with
evident lower cost, usability and flexibility advantages may offer real-time motion analysis. Their
portability and simple setups make IMUs suitable for
ambulatory applications (Luinge et al., 2007).
Different approaches using smart walkers for
gait rehabilitation can be found in the literature. In
some of those researches different spatio-temproral
parameters and gait events are estimated using gyroscopes, accelerometers and encoders but placed only
on the walker and using kinematic models (Wang et
al., 2014). Other authors used a combination of data
2049

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

from a LFR (laser range finder) and IMUs placed on
both walker and user to develop control strategies
based on inverse kinematic evaluated on an inclined
path (Tausel et al., 2014).
Meanwhile, fall detection algorithms for smart
walker are proposed in Hirata et al., 2008 e Huang et
al., 2014. In Hirata et al., 2008, two LFRs were used
in order to estimate the location of users center of
gravity (CoG) in real time, generating control actions
on the wheels to stop the walker in an attempt to
prevent the user falling. Another algorithm to estimate the CoG was proposed in Huang et al., 2014,
using IMUs and anthropometric measures i.e. length
of body segments.
In the previous researches, different methods
were proposed to accomplish human gait assessment
and control strategies for human-walker interaction,
path following and fall prevention. However, practical and interactive proposals for continuous monitoring, providing feedback, localization and mapping
for walkers have been little explored. Therefore, this
work aims to develop a system that allows monitoring smart walker user performance, providing immediate visual biofeedback of gait parameters. In this
paper, a GUI (Graphical User Interface) was developed to estimate hip, knee and ankle joint angles,
also making possible to conceive an integrated system that provides a ZigBee communication channel
between the smart walker and IMU sensors with the
GUI in real time to assess patients performance
during walker-assisted gait.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents the methodology of this work, describing
the sensors, joint kinematics, robotic walker platform, system integration and experimental protocol.
Section 3 describes the experimental results obtained
with the interface. Conclusions and future work are
presented in Section 4.
2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Robotic walker platform
The UFESs smart walker is a 3-wheels walker
with a pair of differential rear wheels driven by DC
motors and a front caster wheel (Rodriguez, 2013).
Control and processing tasks are executed on an
embedded computer based on PC104-Plus standard
(1.67 GHz Atom N450). The application is integrated
into a real-time architecture based on MATLAB
Real-Time xPC Target Toolbox. The walker is instrumented with other sensors, including
 One LRF (Laser Range Finder) sensor model
URG-04LX (Hokuyo, Japan) mounted on the
walker at legs height. This sensor is used to measure the distance between users legs. The UFES
smart walker has a Legs Detection Module (Figure
1) to provide the legs location every 100 ms.

ISSN 2525-8311

 Two 3D Force sensors MTA400 (Futek, US) integrated under each forearm-supporting platform,
which allows measuring six independent components of interaction forces.
 Two high resolution encoders whose signals are
used at the low level control of the DC motors,
which is comprised of a Transmissive Rotary Disk
of one inch of diameter, and 5000 CPR (Cycles Per
Revolution) working together with an EM2
Transmissive Optical Encoder Module (US Digital,
US). The EM2 uses a lensed LED source and a
monolithic detector in circuit to provide a better
performance of signal acquisition. Data from encoders are processed on a Multifunctional AnalogDigital IO board, named Model 526 (Sensoray, US).

Figure 1. UFESs smart walker Modified from Rodriguez, 2013.

2.2 MARG sensors
Four MARG (Magnetic, Angular rate and Gravity) sensors (Figure 2), developed in a previous research (Alfonso, 2014), are used in this work.
MARG sensor includes a 3D accelerometer
(ADXL345), a 3D gyroscope (ITG-3200) and a 3axial digital compass (HMC5883L). Each sensor has
a ZigBee transceiver used for wireless communication. These IMUs are placed on the pelvis and right
lower limb (thigh, shank and foot) in order to quantify and detect user gait features such as joint angles,
walking speed and cadence. To represent the orientation of body segments, quaternion format is used.
Each MARG sensor sends a message to the concentrator every five milliseconds, which contains the
sensor identifier, its gyro data and its orientation data
in quaternion. The concentrator device waits for
messages from all of the four sensors, and every 20
milliseconds sends a message comprising all the
information to the PC. This way, all sensor data are
synchronized (Alfonso, 2014).

2050

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Figure 2. MARG - UFES board Modified from Alfonso, 2014.

2.3 Spatiotemporal and joint kinematics
Hip, knee and ankle joint angles are estimated
using the body-to-sensor calibration procedure and
joint angles extraction method presented in a previous research (Vargas et al., 2014). Basically, a technical-anatomical quaternion is defined for each body
segment (
, orientation quaternion of the body
with respect to the global system). The joint rotation
is calculated as
,

(1)

where
denotes the proximal and the
the distal
segment respect to the global system. The rotation
describes the joint angles, which can be extracted using the Euler sequence ZXY.
Kinematics of the hip, knee and ankle joint are
calculated for total joint excursion throughout the
gait cycle, using the initial contact (Heel Strike -HS)
and Toe Off (TO) events. Total joint excursion is
calculated using the maximum and minimum values
for each joint angle. These discrete parameters were
previously reported in a reference work by Benedetti
et al. (1998), for the three planes of motion. These
parameters allow making a parametric analysis,
which is demonstrated to be a reliable and practical
method to analyze gait data. Also, it is a useful tool
for the assessment of data reliability (Benedetti et al.,
1998). In Table 1, the joint excursion parameters able
to be displayed in the interface which is listed,
named according to Benedetti et al., 1998.
Table 1. Joint angles parameter for gait analysis.
Parameters
()
H6
H7
H10

Description
Total sagittal
plane excursion
Total coronal
plane excursion
Total transverse
plane excursion

Parameters
()
K6
A6
A7

2.4 GUI and systems integration
Figure 3 shows a complete schematic of the systems integrated in this work. A GUI was developed
in order to provide a visual feedback to both user and
therapist. During the walker-assisted gait, the joint
kinematics is plotted in order to promote a continuous monitoring of the user performance.
A coordinator sensor receives data from MARG
sensors. Then, the coordinator sensor transmits the
information to a PC by USART, where the GUI is
installed. Using the GUI, hip, knee and ankle kinematics are calculated based on quaternions, and the
angles, in different planes of movement, are plotted
in a graph. Additionally, the data set can be saved in
a data logger file to allow an off-line data processing.
The GUI was developed using Python programming language, along with a framework appropriated
to design GUIs, the PyQt4, which is an open source
library that can be used to design professional GUIs
(Riberbank, 2015).
The GUI was designed and divided in three
parts. The first one is responsible for communication
tasks. A thread running continuously checks the PC
serial port to get any message coming from the coordinator, which is connected by a USB port (Figure
3). Every time a new data is presented on the serial
buffer, the thread sends it to the second part, which is
the main task, where the quaternions and angular
velocity are processed and the joints kinematics are
estimated. The graphical interface, the third part, is
responsible to show in a graphical form the parameters of interest.

Description
Total sagittal
plane excursion
Total sagittal
plane excursion
Total coronal
plane excursion

The procedure to extract the gait cycles consists of
determining the events HS and TO. Sabatini et al.
(2005) propose a method to determine these parame-

ISSN 2525-8311

ters using the angular velocity sensed by a gyroscope
on the foot.
How proposed by Sabatini et al. (2005), finding
these points comes down to identify the moment
when the foot movement changes its direction if it
changes from clockwise to counter-clockwise, its a
TO moment, otherwise, its a HS. In this work, a
method to determine the HS and TO events was
developed, which uses the derivative of the gyro
signal from foots IMU. A data set formed by the last
three acquired samples, from the foots IMU gyro
data, is stored and its derivative is calculated. If a
change from negative to positive sense occurs, the
center point of the data set is considered a HS or TO
event. An experimental threshold was defined and
used to differentiate both.

2.5 Experimental protocol for preliminary test
One volunteer without gait disabilities was enrolled in this study. IMU sensors were placed on the
pelvis, right thigh, right shank and right foot. The
sensor placed on the pelvis was aligned to the walking direction as proposed in Vargas et al., 2014. The
subject was asked to keep a straight, upright posture
during five seconds before starting walking in a 10
meters walkway. This calibration posture allowed the

2051

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Figure 3 - Schematic diagram of the integrated system.

definition of the body-to-sensor alignment and setting the initial configuration of the GUI. Also, during
this first stage the physiotherapist can check the
sensor communication, and if the data are being
received correctly.
The purpose of this experiment was to check the
communication between sensors and GUI, including
validation and verification of the programming code,
algorithms, graphical library and serial communication in order to display correctly the kinematics parameters. On the screen, hip flexion-extension, hip
abduction-adduction, hip internal-external rotation,
knee flexion-extension, ankle dorsi-plantar flexion
and ankle eversion-inversion are shown.
3 Results
The GUI was designed mainly to provide the
physiotherapist on-line information, during the assistive gait, but moreover, a function able to process
off-line data was also designed. During the daily life,
the patient can choose saving data through the GUI
and then, when assisted by physiotherapist, the progress can be evaluated.
As mentioned in section 2.2, the MARG data fusion algorithm certifies that every 20ms a new dataset is available to the GUI that will have a 20ms
window to process it and display the results graphically. Even though communication is susceptible to
delays in the order of milliseconds, the system usability by the physiotherapist is not affected.
The UFESs smart walker is used as an aid
mechanism to gait, and its embedded system does not
restrict the use of the gait analysis proposed in this
work , allowing patients who do not make use of

ISSN 2525-8311

robotic walkers, also using our the gait analysis system.
This preliminary test demonstrates the feasibility
of design and implementation of an integrated system
to monitor the walker-assisted gait in real time. This
was possible since data from MARG sensors were
correctly collected and on-line processed without
losing information. Using the same dataset, a comparison test between off-line and on-line processing
was performed. Off-line processing was run at
MATLAB. Both data from sensors and processed
data shown on the screen were saved using the GUI.
The capture screen of the GUI presenting angles
related to fragment gait cycle is shown in Figure 4a.
Results of off-line data-processing are shown in
Figure 4b, which are also consistent with those presented in the literature (Vargas et al., 2014), where a
commercial system was used and data were processed off-line. Thus, it is possible to ensure the use
of IMUs as an alternative tool in gait analysis in
addition to a user interface to facilitate online monitoring during the therapy.
So far, six discrete angular kinematic parameters
are being computed online in the system, with total
joint excursion at three planes (H6, H7, H10, K6, A6,
A7) (Benedetti, 1998). Table 2 shows these parameters obtained from the volunteer, with mean and
standard deviation.
The angular velocity from the IMU placed on
the foot was analyzed, and from the information on
sagittal plane, the events TO and HS were calculated.
This information is very important as the HS and TO
events represent the beginning of the stance and
swing phases, respectively. Also, these data allow
extracting gait cycles, understood as the period between two HS instants (Whittle, 2007). In Figure 5,
the processed waveform is shown, where the estima-

2052

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Figure 4. Graphical results for a) on-line b) off-line processing.

tion of HS is indicated with an asterisk and TO with

a square.

Table 2 - Discrete angular kinematic parameters from the volunteer, where Cn identifies the cycle number.
H6 ()
H7 ()
H10 ()
K6 ()
A6 ()
A7 ()

C1
47,8
16,1
18,5
59,5
39,8
31,3

C2
47,0
18,4
20,0
68,5
41,2
37,9

C3
40,2
20,1
20,0
62,7
40,1
33,4

C4
41,0
16,1
19,7
67,4
42,0
35,1

C5
44,0
18,3
19,8
60,8
39,8
33,0

C6
40,0
19,0
20,1
69,7
44,3
32,1

C7
41,3
21,1
18,7
64,6
41,8
32,8

C8
42
17,2
19,0
63,2
39,9
37,4

C9
44,2
20,2
18,9
66.5
41,7
33,2

Mean
43,1
18,5
19,4
64,6
41,2
34,0

 STD
2,7
1,7
0,6
3,44
1,4
2,2

Figure 5 - Detection of Heel Strike (HS) and Toe-Off (TO) events.

ISSN 2525-8311

2053

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

4 Conclusions
This work shows the viability of designing and
implementing a real-time system to analyze the human gait assisted by walker, which will allow physiotherapists improving its diagnostics and making
treatment decision, also making possible a continuous monitoring of the patient.
Using this system, it will also be possible to
generate a data log of patients gait information in
near future. The complete integrated system can be
used in ambulatory applications and the patient will
be able to use it at home during its daily life. In addition, physiotherapists will be able to save the parameters during each test, allowing analyzing the
patients evolution.
Future investigations will be focused on providing other clinical parameters, like maxim flexion at
loading response, maxim flexion at swing phase, and
cadence, allowing physiotherapists improving the
diagnostic based on joint angle parameters.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by CNPq
(3085292013-8), CAPES (34572014) and FAPES
(67566480, 72982608).
References
Alfonso, M. (2014). Desenvolvimento de Sensor
MARG para Análise de Movimento. Dissertação
de mestrado. Universidade Federal do Espirito
Santo.
Benedetti, M. G. Catani, F. Leardini, A. Pignotti,
E. Giannin, S. Datamanagement in gait analysis
for clinical applications. Clinical Biomechanics,
13(3), 204215, 1998.
Frizera A., Elias A., Ama J., Ceres R., Bastos T.
(2012). Characterization of spatio-temporal
parameters of human gait assisted by a robotic
walker. In The Forth IEEE RASEMBS Intl.
Conf.
on
Biomedical
Robotics
and
Biomechatronics, pp. 1087-91.
Hirata, Y., Komatsuda, S., Kosuge, K. (2008). Fall
prevention control of passive intelligent walker
based on human model. In IEEERSJ Intl. Conf.
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
1222-1228.
Huang, J., Xu, W., Mohammed, S., Shu, Z. (2014).
Posture estimation and human support using
wearable sensors and walking-aid robot.
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Vol. 73, pp.
24-43.
Luinge, H. J., Veltink, P. H., Baten, C. T. (2007).
Ambulatory measurement of arm orientation.
Journal of Biomechanics, Vol. 40, no 1, pp. 7885.

ISSN 2525-8311

Lnenburger, L., Colombo, G., Riener, R. (2007).
Biofeedback for robotic gait rehabilitation. J
Neuroeng. Rehabil, Vol. 4, no 1, p 11-11.
Riberbank Computing Limited. (2015) What is
PyQt?, on-line RiverbankComputing.co.uk,
Available
at
httpwww.riverbankcomputing.co.uksoftware
pyqtintro Accesed April 2016
Rodrguez, C., Cifuentes, C. A., Catrinque, P., Neto,
A. F.,  Bastos, T. (2013) Metodologia para
Obtenção de Comandos de Navegação de um
Andador Robótico Através de Sensores de Força
e Laser.
Sabatini, A. M., Martelloni, C., Scapellato, S.,
Cavallo, F. (2005) Assessment of walking
features from foot inertial sensing. Biomedical
Engineering, IEEE Transactions, Vol 52, no 3,
pp 486494.
Tausel, L., Cifuentes, C. A., Rodriguez, C., Frizera,
A., Bastos, T. (2014). Human-walker interaction
on slopes based on LRF and IMU sensors. In 5th
IEEE RAS  EMBS Intl. Conf. on Biomedical
Robotics and Biomechatronics, pp. 227-232.
Tien I., Glaser SD., Aminoff MJ. (2010).
Characterization of gait abnormalities in
Parkinsons disease using a wireless inertial
sensor system. In Proc. Annual Intl. Conf. of the
IEEE Eng. in Med. and Bio. Society (EMBC),
Vol. 31, pp. 3353-3356.
Vargas, L. S., Elias, A., Frizera, A., Rocon, E,
Bastos, T. (2014) Body to Sensor Calibration
Procedure for Lower Limb Joint Angle
Estimation Applied to IMU-based Gait
Analysis.
In Anais do XXIV Congresso
Brasileiro de Engenharia Biomédica (CBEB),
pp. 777-780.
Wang, T., Dune, C., Merlet, J. P., Gorce, P., Sacco,
G., Robert, P., Guerin, O. (2014). A new
application of smart walker for quantitative
analysis of human walking. In Computer VisionECCV 2014. Workshops. Springer International
Publishing, pp. 464-480.
Whittle, M. W. Gait analysis an introduction (4th
ed.). Butterworth Heinemann, 2007.

2054