Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

MARKOV JUMP LINEAR SYSTEMS AND A GENERALIZATION OF THE
CONCEPT OF RISK SENSITIVITY
Jack Baczynski


Departmento de Sistemas e Controle
Laboratorio Nacional de Computacao Cientfica - LNCCMCT
Av. Getulio Vargas, 333, Petropolis
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 25651-075, jack@lncc.br
Email jack@lncc.br
Abstract A new concept of risk sensitivity is given which unveils a wide class of functions not detected
as risk sensitive in the standard scenario. It provides an equivalent risk measure concerning, for instance, the
exponential quadratic format of the well known LEQG optimal control problem. Benefiting from this feature,
the criteria yields to further inroads on a risk sensitive optimal control problem associated to linear systems with
Markov jump parameters. Connections and equivalences between the standard concept and the one presented
herein are established. Parallel to the risk sensitive standard case, a characterization of the concept via a family
of convex functions is made, if interpreted in a probabilistic sense. Finally, it is noteworthy that a structural
feature of the concept is that it enhances the possibilities of shaping the risk profile of the controller or investor,
as well as the computational tractability.
Keywords

risk sensitive, stochastic control, Markov jump Linear systems

Resumo Apresentamos um novo conceito de sensibilidade a risco o qual prove um ampla classe de funcoes
que, a luz do conceito classico, nao e detetada como risco sensitiva. O criterio prove a mesma medida de risco
daquela do conceito classico, por exemplo, se considerarmos a forma exponencial quadratica de custo do conhecido
problema de controle_otimo LEQG . A partir dessa nova classe de funcoes, novas possibilidades se abrem para
a resolucao do problema de controle_otimo risco_sensitivo associado a sistemas_lineares com saltos_markovianos.
Conexoes e equivalencias sao estabelecidas entre os dois criterios. Analogamente ao que ocorre no cenario classico,
caracterizamos o novo conceito por famlias de funcoes convexas, tomando-se esta caracterizacao dentro de um
contexto probabilstico. Vale mencionar que uma propriedade estrutural do criterio de risco aqui apresentado e o
aumento das possibilidades na modelagem do perfil do controlador ou investidor e na modelagem computacional.
Palavras-chave



Introduction

It is a well known fact that the suitable choice of
the cost function in a control problem or a game
theoretical approach is of fundamental importance
in order to meet the demands of the controllers or
strategists. A seminal form of cost is the so called
quadratic cost - an additive cost function where
each instantaneous cost in the sum is a quadratic
function of the state and the control. In the discrete time and finite horizon scenario, it is given
by
N
X
ci < 1, c>  l(c),
(1)
C
i1

with c  (c1 , ..., cN )  RN , 1  (1, ..., 1)  RN
and integer N . The expectation is then applied
if dealing within the stochastic context. Albeit
a suitable representation in many practical problems, this cost structure, in the search of optimality, is senseless to noise when associated to a
linear dynamics where a Gaussian noisy entry is
added - the so-called LQG optimal control problem. This could lead the controller or investor to
a risky choice that possibly he or she would not
be aiming at.
To overcome this point, risk sensitivity was
introduced by means of a convex function  
R  R applied to the random variable C - that

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

globally represents the cost, and hence producing
the risk sensitive version
C  (C)
of C. The cost or the performance index E(C)
is therefore considered in lieu of EC (8). A
typical convex function is the exponential one,
which addresses the so-called LEQG optimal control problem solved by Jacobson in his celebrated
1973 paper (7). Henceforth, the optimal policy
or strategy becomes no more static as the amount
of noise or risk varies. The importance of introducing risk sensitivity in applications can be
perceived, for instance, in finance, where, in the
search for optimality, risk sensitivity means the
capability of taking into consideration swaps between increases of return rates and decreases of
risk in volatile markets, according to the investors
profile.
Although an important step in terms of introducing risk sensitivity in control problems, this
risk sensitive modification focus C, remaining
senseless in terms of the risk components directly
associated to the instantaneous costs ci . Technically speaking (see Proposition 9), changes on the
probability density functions of c along the orthogonal space of 1 are senseless in what concerns the
standard approach E(C). This is actually de-

323

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

sired if the controller or strategist establishes C
( f (c)) as his risk objective r.v.. Otherwise, if
the interest of the controller is on the richer ensemble c or some combination of entries of c as his
risk objective, acuity, in terms of risk sensitivity,
will be lost. It is worth noticing that, in practice,
doubts concerning the length of the time horizon
may detracts C as a risk objective, in which case
the ensemble c of all instantaneous costs stands as
a more natural fit.
Hence, in the general situation, the standard
class of risk sensitive functions  - performing
(C)  (  l)(c) - will not be able to cope with
the controller or strategist needs and a risk sensitive function not shaped as  l would be required
in order to produce risk sensitivity in the desired
way.
In this paper, a new concept of risk sensitivity
is given by means of a real valued convex function
h, defined on the ensemble of the instantaneous
costs c - an r.v. with values in RN , richer in structure than the overall real valued cost r.v. C. In
conjunction with a risk sensitive criteria (Section
3), the modification Eh(c) is considered in lieu of
El(c), as the controller or strategist establishes c
as his risk objective r.v. in lieu of C. Risk sensitivity is therefore enforced by means of h(), relative
to the (risk neutral) affine l(). Notice that C is
preserved as the r.v. of original cost of interest
while focus in terms of risk sensitivity is now on
c.
An structural feature of this concept is that it
allows expanding the set of risk sensitive modifications far beyond the standard set of possibilities,
thus unveiling a wide class of functions not contemplated or detected as risk sensitive in the standard scenario (we may see this setting h    l,
which entirely replicates the standard class of risk
sensitive versions). It is worth mentioning that
the research thrust in obtaining a closed solution
for the risk sensitive LEQG problem where the
dynamics parameters are subject to Markovian
jumps - the so-called JLEQG control problem - directly benefited from the new concept. For a small
sample of references involving LSMJP or MJLS
dynamics - a shorthand for Linear Systems with
Markov Jump Parameters or Markov Jump Linear
Systems - see 1-5 and the references therein),
and for the risk sensitive matter see 5-10.
The concept described herein addresses naturally cost functions that are not necessarily affine,
which motivates the notation C  f (c) instead of
C  l(c) whenever the non-affine case occurs.
Section 4 of the paper establishes connections
between the standard and the new risk sensitive
criteria. An important result is that both criteria
are equivalent if dealing with cost functions that
are affine (l(c)) - as it is the case of 7. Moreover,
both criteria assign a same risk measure (see the
definition in Section 4). Clearly, the comparison

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

is restricted to the cases where h    l, since
the standard criteria is simply not defined elsewhere. Connections between both criteria for the
case where the cost functions are not necessarily
affine are provided in Section 4 too.
In spite of the fact that, in the general case,
the correspondence between the index C  l(c)
and its risk sensitive version C  h(c) does not
even exist as a function, Section 5 shows that, in
a probabilistic sense, it (the correspondence) can
be characterized by a family of convex functions
(on R), whenever h is convex. This parallels the
standard case.
In this paper we deal with the discrete time
and finite horizon case.
Finally, we point out for the fact that, under
the light of the new concept, the computational
tractability as well as the possibilities of shaping
the risk profile of the controller or investor are
enhanced.
2

Preliminaries

Denote  a convex set of Rn , q a function from 
into R and  a function from R into R. Also, we
assume an underlying probability triplet (, F, P).
We shall denote C1 the class of all integrable valued r.vs. c and C2  c  C1  Eq(c) exists
(to avoid notational burden we suppress the index
q that should go along with C2 ). We shall write U1
for the class of all integrable R-valued r.vs. and,
for an arbitrary class C  C1 , define
f C    U1   c  C performing   q(c).
Also denote U2    U1  E() exists (again,
to avoid notational burden we suppress the index
 that should go along with U2 ).
Lemma 1 and Definition convexity We say
that q is convex if for each z   there is an affine
mapping lz  Rn  R such that lz (z)  q(z) and
lz (x)  q(x) x  , x 6 z, or equivalently, if
q((1  t)x + ty)  (1  t)q(x) +tq(y) for every
x, y   and t  (0, 1). Strict convexity means
replacing  by < in the expressions above.
Lemma 2 q is convex iff Eq(c)  q(Ec)  0 for
every c  C2 .
Proof Suppose that q is convex. So, take an auxiliary linear mapping l  Rn  R such that l(x)
 q(x) x   and l(Ec)  q(Ec) - since  is convex we have that Ec   so q(Ec) is well defined.
Therefore l exists for any value of Ec  . Hence
qc  lc (pointwise). Hence Eqc  E lc  lEc 
qEc. Now, suppose that q is not convex. Then,
we can pick some r.v. c which distribution concentrates in the non-convex part of q, and such that
Eq(c) exists, in which case Eq(c)  q(Ec)  0 fails
to occur a contradiction.
2

324

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

3

The risk sensitive concept

Let  be a convex set of Rn and f and h be Rvalued functions defined on . Also, consider an
arbitrary class C of integrable -valued r.vs. and,
for c  C, let C  f (c) be the cost or performance index r.v. of original interest in a control
problem or a theoretical game approach. Then set
the following
Definition risk sensitivity We say that
h is risk sensitive relative to f , in the class C, if
Eh(c) exists and
N (c)  0,

(2)

for every c  C, where
N (c)  Eg(c)  g(Ec)
 Eh(c)  h(Ec)  Ef (c)  f (Ec),

(3)

and g  h  f . We then say that C  h(c) is the
risk sensitive modification of C in class C and that
(3) expresses the penalty for risk taking assigned
to h, relative to that of f .
We say that the terms Eh(c)  h(Ec) and
Ef (c)  f (Ec) - which are not necessarily positive - express the absolute penalty for risk taking
assigned to h and f , respectively.
For the sake of interpretation, we define the
c-dependent vertical shift c  gE(c)  h(Ec) 
f (Ec), so that (2) rewrites Eh(c)  Ef (c) + c .
Remark
The term c avoids the need of
producing a touching point at Ec, i.e., the version h  h + cte, of h, such that h(Ec)  f (Ec)
hence suppressing the bias for risk sensitive comparison purposes.
For the arbitrary class C above, the absolute
penalty assigned to any affine mapping f  l is
null. Whence, l expresses the risk neutral case
and, if h is risk sensitive relative to l, then h is
risk sensitive relative to any - innocuous - affine
transformation l. The penalty assigned to h relative to any affine l is invariant and coincides with
the absolute penalty Eh(c)  h(Ec) of h.
Notation We shall use the abbreviations
i. hf C for h is risk sensitive relative to f , in
the class C and

Proof Straightforward from Proposition 2 and
the definition of risk sensitivity above. In particular, when f  l is affine, we have that
Ef (c)  f (Ec)  0, so that (2) and (3) gives
us Eh(c)  h(Ec)  0, c  C2 , which is equivalent
to saying that h is convex.
2
Since the performance index assigns a cost
and not a reward, the above definition indicates
risk aversion. Mutatis mutandis, all can be rewritten in the risk preference case.
4

Capturing the standard risk sensitive
scenario

In the standard risk sensitive case, C  f (c) and
its risk sensitive modification C have a correspondence by means of a convex function  on R (i.e.,
from R into R), hence performing
C  (C).

(4)

Note that , being convex, is equivalent to having
E()  (E) for every   U2 (see Proposition
4 below). This characterizes C as the risk sensitive
version of C in the classical way.
With a view to connecting both concepts, we
shall generalize slightly the classical notion using
an arbitrary class C  C1 , f C in lieu of U2 , and
setting  as function on R, not necessarily convex.
We now set the following
Definition standard risk sensitivity We
say that  is standard risk sensitive in the class
f C - which we shall denote f C - if E(C) exists
and
S(C)  0
(5)
for every C  f C, where
S(C)  E(C)  (EC).

(6)

We then say that C is the standard risk sensitive
modification of C  f (c), in class f C, and that
(5) expresses the penalty for risk taking assigned
to .
Lemma 4  is convex iff  is standard risk sensitive in the class U2 , i.e., U2 .
Proof Straightforward from Proposition 2 and
the definition of standard risk sensitivity.
2

ii. hC ( hlC) for h is risk sensitive relative
to (any) affine l, in the class C or simply h
is risk-sensitive in the class C.

We capture the standard risk sensitive functions in our scenario by setting

Lemma 3 g  h  f is convex iff h is risk sensitive relative to f , in the class C2 , i.e., hf C2 .
In the case f  l is affine, the above equivalence
extends to h is convex, and we may write hC2
in lieu of hf C2 .

so that C  h(c)  (f (c))  (C), which is (4).

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

h    f ,

(7)

With a view to a geometric approach, we may
write
  h  f 1  R  R
(8)

325

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

with h viewed as a set function, which means having, for every y  R, some z  R such that
f 1 (y)  x    f (x)  y and h1 (z)  x 
  h(x)  z coincide. In the general case, i.e.,
where the restriction (7) is suppressed, such coincidence will not occur.
For comparison purposes with the definition
of risk sensitivity in the new concept, we may
rewrite (5) - (6) as
S1 (c)  0

(9)

for every c  C, where
S1 (c)  Eh(c)  h(Ec)  (Ef (c))  (f (Ec))
 S(C).
(10)
To see this, we write
S(C)  E(C)  (EC)
 E(f (c))  h(Ec) + (  f )(Ec)  (Ef (c))

In the standard case, the risk sensitive functions  are commonly strictly non-decreasing convex functions. (for instance, the exponential
ones). Therefore, a risk measure in the original
scale of the cost can be established
(11)

Due precisely to its richer structure, the concept
presented herein has no such a direct access. For
instance, h and f do not have a correspondence
by means of a function, even less one that admits
an inverse. The particular case where this correspondence appears is when h    f and  is
invertible - which completely captures the (typically convex) functions of the standard case and,
more generally, those functions listed in the definition of standard risk sensitivity. It is noteworthy
that, in the standard concept, risk sensitivity is
established or not regardless the shape of f , since
solely  is taken into account. In the new concept
a direct involvement of f and h emerges.
Notice that  is not required to have an inverse. If  is invertible, then viewing f and h as
set functions, we get
S2 (c)
 1 Eh(c)  1 h(Ec)  Ef (c)  f (Ec)
 1 Ef (c)  f (Ec)  Ef (c)  f (Ec)
 S o (C).
(12)
If in addition  is non-decreasing, then S(C) 
0  S2 (c)  0, so that (5) - (6) is equivalent to
having
S2 (c)  0
(13)

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Lemma 5 Let c be any integrable Rn -valued r.v.
and define
c  (Ef (c)  f (Ec))  ((Ef (c))  (f (Ec)))
 (Ef (c))  (f (Ec))  S(C)  N (c).
(14)
where   I   (i.e., (x)  x  (x)) and I is
the identity function on R. Then
N (c)  0  S(C)  c and S(C)  0
(15)

 N (c)  c .

Moreover, if  is invertible and non-decreasing,
then
S2 (c) ( S o (C))  0  S1 (c) ( S(C))  0

 S1 (c).

S o (C)  1 (E(C))  EC (  0).

for every c  C.
So, assuming h    f , the connection between the risk sensitive criteria introduced in this
paper and the classical one starts to appear, as
the propositions and corollaries that follow shows.

 N (c)  c .
(16)
Proof c  S(C)  N (c), so that (15) follows.
2
Theorem 6 A sufficient condition to have
hf C  f C, hf C  f C
and f C  hf C,

(17)

respectively, is
c  0, c  0 and

c  0

for every c  C.
Proof Fix an arbitrary c  C. The definition of
risk sensitivity and the 1st expression of (15) gives
us that
def

hf c  N (c)  0  S(f (c))  c .
By its turn, the definition of standard risk sendef
sitivity says that f (c)  S(f (c))  0. If
c  0, then S(f (c))  c  S(f (c))  0,or
else, hf c  f (c). Since c  C is arbitrary, then hf C  f C. Analogously, if
c  0, then S(f (c))  0  S(f (c))  c , or
else, f (c)  hf c. Since c  C is arbitrary, then f C  hf C. Alternatively, we
may use the 2nd expression of (15) in lieu of the
1st expression, obtaining
def

f (c)  S(f (c))  0  N (c)  c
and hf c  N (c)  0, using N (c)  0 
N (c)  c if c  0 and N (c)  c  N (c) 
0, if c  0.
2

326

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

We focus the affine scenario, where f  l, so
that h    l. Firstly, an auxiliary lemma.
Lemma 7 Let h    f , where  is a function
on R, f    Rn  R is affine and  is a convex
set. Suppose that D()  Im(f ) is a convex set
(an interval on R). Then h is convex iff  is
convex.
We now have the following
Theorem 8 Let f  l be affine and denote C2 
c  C1  Eh(c) exists. Then the following expressions are equivalent
a. h is convex,
b. h  f is convex,
c. hC2 ,
d. f C2 ,
e.  is convex, or else, U2 .
Moreover, the risk measure in both concepts
are the same, namely, S(C)  N (c)  Ehc 
hEc.
Proof (a  b  c  d) we use Proposition 3
and (reminding that c  0) the first expression of
(17) with C  C2 . Now, Lemma 7 gives us (a 
e) (notice that f C2 not necessarily equals U1 , so
that Proposition 2 does not apply to directly prove
(d  e)). The same risk measure in both concepts
stems from (10) and (3).
2
Furthermore, with f  l  < , v > + d,
d  R and 0 6 v  Rn , setting   Rn and
writing
v   y  Rn < y, v > 0
for the (n1)-dimensional linear subspace orthogonal to v, we have

Proof Equation (18) follows from the fact that
h(l1 (y))  cte for an arbitrary y  R and
l1 (y)  v. Now, h(z) is constant for any z 
l1 (y), so take z  kv, k  R, such that l(kv)  y.
Since l1 (y)  v, k exists and is unique. Deriving, we obtain y  l(kv)  < kv, v > +
and 19) fold  k kvk2 + d, so that k  (yd)
kvk2
lows. The proof for the second part of the Lemma
is straightforward Eh(ck )  E(< ck , v >
2
+d)  E(k kvk + d).
2
Hence, for costs that are affine on c 
(c1 , ..., cn ) - which is the case of 7, the above
proposition (in its first part) shows how simple
the class of functions h is in order to encompass
entirely the risk sensitive standard case. Or, in the
other way round, it shows how significative is the
augmentation of the class of functions that now,
under the new concept, are allowed to shape a
risk sensitive problem. Furthermore, Proposition
8 shows that both concepts in the affine scenario
(with h    l) are equivalent. The second part
of Proposition 8 tell us that in the standard case
- brought to light via h(c)  (  l)(c)  (C) the performance index E(  l)(c) ( E(C))
remains senseless with respect to changes of the
probability density functions of c along the orthogonal space of v.
In the LEQG setup the cost function r.v. of
n
P
ci - n being the
original interest is C  l(c) 
i1

time horizon and c  (c1 , ..., cn )    Rn0 ,
while the risk sensitive modification is (C) 
n
P
ci . We get
exp 21 C, or else, h(c)  exp 12 
i1

therefore equivalence in that hC2  f C2 and
the risk measure in both concepts are the same.
Connections between the two criteria extend
to cost functions that are not necessarily affine.
Namely, cost representatives that are convex or
concave functions f are the focus of comparison in
the following propositions. For this, denote a 
inff (x)  x   (which may be ).

Theorem 9 h degenerates along v  , i.e.,
h(rv + z)  h(rv) for every z  v  ,

(18)

while  is a scaling and a shift of r 7 (r) 
h(rv), in that
!
(r  d)
(r  d)
1
(r)  hl (r)  h
(
2 v
2 ),
kvk
kvk
(19)
or else,
(r)  (kvk2 r + d).
In addition, defining ck  kv + kc, where k and
k are R-valued r.vs., and c is an Rn -valued r.v.
such that v  c a.s., it follows that Eh(ck ) is
invariant with respect to the r.v. k.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Theorem 10 Let

d+ 
dx (y)

 1 y > a. Then

a. f C2  hf C2 for every convex f . In addition, let  be convex - which means U2 .
Then hf C2 for every convex f (clearly, it
+
suffices to have ddx (a)  1 only).
b. hf C2  f C2 for every concave f .
+

Proof (a)  ddx (y)  1 y > a implies that  as in Proposition 5 - is non-increasing on (a, ).
Moreover, Ef (c)  f (Ec)  a. Hence, from (14),
we have that c  0  c  C2 . Corollary 6
completes the proof. Now, Proposition 4 gives us
the equivalence. Also, f C2  U2 , so we have that
f C2 .

327

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

(b)  Mutatis mutandis, for concave f , we obtain c  0  c  C2 . Corollary 6 then applies.
2
Theorem 11 Let  be non-increasing on (a, ).
Then

functions l  q  R0  R0 and q invertible and
continuous, and therefore
C  f (C) a.s.,

b. hf C2  f C2 for every convex f .
Proof (a)  If  is non-increasing and f is
concave then, for every c  C2 , we have that
(Ef (c))  (f (Ec))  0, so that c  Ef (c) 
f (Ec)  0 and Corollary 6 completes the proof.
The rest of the proof goes in the same lines as
those of Proposition 10.
(b)  Mutatis mutandis, if f is convex, then
(Ef (c))  (f (Ec))  0, so that c  Ef (c) 
f (Ec)  0, and we appeal to Corollary 6.
2
Remark Results could also be obtained addressing functions  that are concave. However
this would boil down to empty sets of functions
(remind that we are focussing the risk preference
case).
5

A direct connection between the
original index and its risk sensitive
modification

As noticed in the preceding section, the correspondence C  C, with C  h(c) and C  l(c),
in general does not exist as a function. In this
Section some scenarios are structured where, in
a probabilistic sense, a convex correspondence is
preserved, which recovers the usual setting found
in the literature. The scenarios that follow may
approximate more general contexts.
5.1

1st scenario

We set the Rn0 -valued r.v. c such that P c 
q(s)  1, where s is an R0 -valued r.v. and q 
R0  Rn0 is a continuous - therefore measurable - path with q(0)  0 a.s.. This goes for the
idea of having all the probability of c concentrated
n
on the path p  z  R0
 z  q(s) for some s
 0, i.e., P c  p  1. For an affine transformation l and a convex function h, both from Rn0
to R0 , let C  l(c) and C  h(c) respectively
stand for the original cost of interest and its risk
sensitive version.
Theorem 12 For q prescribed as Dabove, Elet it
also be differentiable and such that l, dq
ds > 0,

where l stands for the gradient of l and dq
ds 
dq1
dqn 
( ds ... ds ) ). This is equivalent to having the

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

(20)

as well as
c  q  (l  q)1 (C) a.s..

a. f C2  hf C2 for every concave f . In
addition, let  be convex - which means U2
. Then hf C2 for every concave f .

f  h  q  (l  q)1 ,

(21)

If q is linear, then so is q  (l  q)1  R0  Rn0 ,
in which case f is convex and means only a scaling
of h, and we clearly have
E C  Ef (C)  f (EC).

(22)

Proof Equations (21) and (20) stem from c 
q(s) a.s., since
c  q(s)  C  l(c)  l(q(s))  s  (l  q)1 (C)
 c  q(s)  q((l  q)1 (C))
 C  h(c)  hq(s)  h(q((l  q)1 (C)))
so that
P c  q(s)  P c  (q((l  q)1 (C)))
 P C  f (C).

(23)
2

Equations (20) and (22) recover the usual setting found in the literature, which is modifying the
original cost of interest C by some convex function
to obtain risk sensitivity.
5.2

2nd scenario

We set the Rn0 -valued r.v. c, such that
m
P (m
i1 c  qi (s))  P (c  i1 qi (s))  1,
(24)
where s is an R0 -valued r.v., i is a discrete r.v.
taking values in 1, ..., m, which we set as independent of s, and qi  R0  Rn0 are continuous - therefore measurable - paths with qi (0)  0,
i  1, ..., m. As above, this goes for the idea of
having the probability of c concentrated on the
paths pi  z  Rn0  z  qi (s), for some s 
0, i.e.,
P (m
i1 c  pi )  1.

For an affine transformation l and a convex function h, both from Rn0 to R0 , let C  l(c) and C
 h(c) respectively stand for the original cost of
interest and its risk sensitive version. Notice that
i is also viewed as a discrete r.v. taking values in
1, ..., m, so that, for a given  in the probability
space, we have, e.g., c()  qi() (s()) a.s. and
C()  l(qi() (s())) a.s..

Theorem 13 For qi , i  1, ..., m, prescribed as
above, let them also be differentiable and such that

328

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

D

i
l, dq
ds

of l and

E

> 0, where l stands for the gradient

dqi
ds

 ( dqdsi1 ...



dqim
ds )

). This is equivalent

to having the functions l  qi  R0  R0 and qi
invertible and continuous, and therefore
P (m
i1 C  fi (C))  1,

fi  h  qj  (l  qi )1 ,
(25)

as well as
1
P (m
(C))  1.
i1 c  qi  (l  qi )

(26)

In general, the functions fi are not convex. If qi
is linear for each i, then qi  (l  qi )1  R0 
Rn0 is linear, so that fi are convex - meaning
only different scalings of h, in which case
E C  Efi (C)  Efi (EC),

(27)

let C(1 )  C(2 )  a and, viewing i as an r.v.,
also let i(1 ) 6 i(2 ). Hence C(1 )  fi(1 ) (a) 6
fi(2 ) (a)  C(2 ). Hence, in spite of the absence
of an explicit deterministic (convex) correspondence between the original index of interest C and
its risk sensitivity version C, equations (25) and
(27) establish such correspondence via a group of
convex functions, in a probabilistic sense.
5.3

3rd scenario

If we take the setup of item 1, allowing i to take
values in an infinite countable set, for instance the
rational set Qn0 , and set qi  R0  Rn0 to be
linear and such that qi (x)  ix, then a dense and
uniform coverage of Rn0 is obtained, so that
the concentration of probability in the above cases
dilutes. Nonetheless, (24)-(27) still hold.

where the average EC is taken on s alone.
6
Proof We have that

We provide a new and flexible format of risk sensitive functions for use in control problems or game
theoretical approaches. The term new stems
from having these functions defined in RN , a space
that is richer in structure than R - the one that
arises in the standard case moreover our format
recast the risk sensitive functions of the standard
case. The term flexible is used since convexity is
not mandatory, in spite of being important in our
context too.

c  qi (s)  C  l(c)  l(qi (s))
 s  (l  qi )1 (C)
 c  qi (s)  qi ((l  qi )1 (C)))
 C  h(c)  hqi (s)
 h(qi ((l  qi )1 (C)))  fi (C),
so that
m
1
m
(C)))
i1 c  qi (s)  i1 c  qi ((l  qi )

 m
i1 C  fi (C).
Reminding (24), we get (25) and (26). Now, for
the r.vs. s and i as above, we get
Efi ((l  qi )(s))  EEfi ((l  qi )(s))i
 Efi (E(l  qi )(s)i)

Conclusions

(28)

 Efi (E(l  qi )(s)),
where E(l  qi )(s) in the last term averages in s
only this is due to having i independent from s.
The inequality follows since fi is a convex function
for any fixed value i. Now, noticing that
C  (l  qi )(s) a.s. and C  fi (C)
 fi ((l  qi )(s)) a.s., i.e.,
C()  (l  qi() )(s()) a.s. and
C()  fi() (C())  fi() ((l  qi() )(s())) a.s.,

In order to legitimate our concept, we recast
the classical risk sensitive criteria into our more
general framework obtaining satisfactory results.
For instance, equivalence between both concepts
as well as a same risk measure occur whenever
the original cost of interest is an affine function which is the case, e.g., of 7.
New risk sensitive functions as well as the
criteria presented herein are then at disposal for
replacing the well exploited exponential function
that appears in the above references. This may
contribute to the research thrust towards obtaining closed solutions or good approximations of
them in optimal control problems, specially if dynamic programming is the chosen technique.
It is noteworthy that easiness of computational tractability and the possibility of hand conducting the controllers or investors risk sensitivity profile are strong attributes of the index provided herein.

we may rewrite (28) as (27) where, due to the
mutual independence of i and s, the average EC
is taken on s alone.
2

References

Notice that the correspondence between C
and C is, in general, not even a function. To see
this, it suffices to consider an underlying measurable space (, F ) and, for some 1 , 2   ,

1 Costa, E.F., Val, J.B., Fragoso, M.D., On
a detectability concept of discrete-time infinite Markov jump linear systems. Stoch. An.
App., v.23, n.1, pp.1-14, 2005.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

329

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

2 Baczynski, J., Fragoso M.D., Maximal versus
Strong Solution to Algebraic Riccati Equations Arising in Infinite Markov Jump Linear
Systems, Systems and Control Letters., v.57,
pp.246-254, 2008.
3 Costa, O.L.V., Fragoso, M.D., Marques, R.P.
. Discrete-Time Markov Jump Linear Systems, Springer-Verlag, 2004.
4 Baczynski, J., Fragoso M.D., Optimal Control for Continuous-Time Linear Quadratic
Problems with Infinite Markov Jump Parameters, SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, v.40, pp.270-297 , 2001.
5 Baczynski, J., Fragoso M.D. and Lopes, E.P.,
On a discrete time linear jump stochastic dynamic game, Int. J. of Syst. Science, v.32,
pp.979-988, 2001.
6 Jacobson, D.H., Optimal stochastic linear
systems with exponential performance criteria and their relation to deterministic differential games, IEEE Trans. Autom. Contr.,
v.18, pp.124-131, 1973.
7 Whittle, P., Risk Sensitive Optimal Control,
Wiley  Sons, 1990.
8 Fan, C., Speyer, J.L., and Jaensch, C.R.,
Centralized and decentralized solutions of the
linear-exponential Gaussian problem, IEEE
Tr. on Autom. Contr., v.39, 1986-2003, 1994.
9 Fleming, W.H., Some results and problems
in risk-sensitive stochastic control, Computational and Applied Mathematics, v.16, pp.99115, 1997.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

330