DESIGN AND EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION OF A ROBUST H2 CONTROLLER APPLIED TO A
BOOST CONVERTER
VINÍCIUS F. MONTAGNER* LUIZ A. MACCARI JR.* RICARDO C. L. F. OLIVEIRA
*

Power Eletronics and Control Research Group
Federal University of Santa Maria UFSM
97105-900, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil



School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Campinas  UNICAMP
13083-852, Campinas, SP, Brazil

E-mails vfmontagner@gmail.com luizmaccari@gmail.com
ricfow@dt.fee.unicamp.br
Abstract
 This paper proposes the design and experimental validation of a robust H2 control technique for a boost converter.
The design procedure adopts a linearized model of the converter affected by time-varying uncertain parameters with a polytopic
structure. Using this model, an optimal H2 state feedback controller (under quadratic stability) is synthesized through convex
optimization based on linear matrix inequalities. The control gains ensure closed-loop stability and an H2 guaranteed cost for the
entire set of uncertainties and also for arbitrary parametric variation inside this set. A boost converter of nominal power equal to
100W is used for the design of the controller. The input voltage, the operating point duty cycle and the load are considered as
uncertain and arbitrarily time-varying parameters. The control gains obtained for this converter produce good simulation and
experimental results. The quality of the results is measured by means of fast transient responses and small overshoots and
undershoots on the output voltage. The experimental validation prove the viability of practical application of an H2 robust
control technique for this plant.
Keywords
 Boost converter, robust control, optimal control, convex optimization, linear matrix inequalities.
Resumo
 Este artigo propõe o projeto e a validação experimental de um controlador H2 robusto para um conversor_boost. O
procedimento de projeto adota um modelo_linearizado do conversor afetado por parâmetros incertos variantes no tempo com
uma estrutura politópica. Usando esse modelo, um controlador ótimo H2 (sob a estabilidade quadrática) por realimentação de
estados é sintetizado por meio de otimização_convexa baseada em desigualdades_matriciais_lineares. Os ganhos de controle
asseguram a estabilidade em malha_fechada e um custo_garantido H2 para todo o conjunto de incertezas e também para
variações paramétricas arbitrárias dentro deste conjunto. Um conversor_boost de potência nominal de 100W é usado para o
projeto do controlador. A tensão de entrada, a razão cíclica no ponto de operação e a carga são considerados como parâmetros
incertos e variantes no tempo de forma arbitrária. Os ganhos do controlador obtidos para este conversor produzem bons
resultados de simulação e experimentais. A qualidade dos resultados é medida por respostas transitórias rápidas, com sobressinal
e afundamentos de sinal pequenos na tensão de saída. A validação experimental demonstra a viabilidade da aplicação prática de
uma técnica de controle_robusto H2 para esta planta.
 Conversor boost, controle_robusto, controle_ótimo, otimização_convexa, desigualdades_matriciais_lineares.
Palavras-chave

 1993 Boyd et al.,
1994).
Robust
control
techniques
have
been
investigated in several works available in control
literature but their applicability for power converters
has been explored in few works as in (Gabe et al.,
2009 Olalla et al., 2009). In this scenario, this paper
proposes the application and experimental validation
of a robust state feedback H2 controller for a boost
converter with load, input voltage and operating point
duty cycle considered as uncertain and arbitrarily
time-varying parameters. The converter linearized
model is described using a polytopic representation
based on (Olalla et al., 2009) to take into account the
parametric uncertainty. The conditions from
(Geromel et al., 1992) are used here for computation
of stabilizing state feedback gains that also ensure an
H2 guaranteed cost for the closed-loop system,
leading to a controller that provides robust stability
with respect to parametric variation and also

1 Introduction
Boost converters are an important class of DC-DC
converters used in several applications as hibrid
electric_vehicles, power factor correction and lighting
systems (Kassakian et al., 1991). The averaged state
space model of a conventional boost converter is
nonlinear and can be linearized assuming that the
system works at some operating point (equilibrium
point) and that it suffers only small perturbation
around this point (Erickson and Maksimovic, 2001
Kassakian et al., 1991 Khalil, 2002). In this case,
linear control techniques can be readily applied
(Chen, 1999 Ogata, 2001). However, for several
situations in practice, the converter may suffer with
large perturbation, as for instance load variations in
wide ranges. In these situations, robust control laws
become attractive, providing controllers that ensure
stability and performance for the closed-loop system
1549



guaranteed capacity of rejection of disturbances.
Simulation and experimental results demonstrate that
the closed-loop system presents good performance in
terms of fast transient and zero steady state errors
when affected by variations of the parameters,
proving the robustness of the controller obtained for
the application.

t
x (t ) 


 (t )  
 ,  (t )   xC ( ) d
t
(
)



0

where

Vg





0
D d L





V
,
B

g

 (4)
0 
2
 D d R C 



0
0


Assuming that the load parameter R, the
complementary operating point duty-cycle Dd and
the input voltage Vg can vary independently, even
arbitrarily fast inside given intervals, one has that
matrices (4) can be represented by a polytope of
matrices.
The boost converter, including now the
disturbance input vector w(t ) and the controlled

 0

A   D d
 C

 0

Consider the boost converter given in Figure 1.
L

DB
+
+

Vg

xC

SB

C

vo

R



Figure 1. Boost converter.

A state space averaged model of the converter in
continuous conduction mode is given by (Olalla et
al., 2009)
x ( t )  A  ( Aon  Aoff )U x ( t )

(

off

+ ( Aon  Aoff ) x ( t ) u ( t )

(

+ ( Aon  Aoff

(

)

) X + Buon  Buoff

D d
L
1

RC
1



(

)

output vector 
y (t ) , can be represented by the timevarying polytopic model given by

(1)





 (t )  A( (t )) (t ) + B ( (t ))u (t )
+ E ( (t )) w(t )

) ) u ( t )

where Aon and Buon are the dynamic matrices

(5)



y (t )  C ( (t )) (t ) + D ( (t ))u (t )

during the time interval where the switch is on and
Aoff and Boff are the dynamic matrices during the

where
N

N

i 1

i 1

N

N

i 1

i 1

A( (t ))    i (t ) Ai , B ( (t ))    i (t ) Bi ,

time interval where the switch is off. The incremental
and equilibrium input vectors are u ( t ) and U while
the incremental and equilibrium state vectors are
x ( t ) and X , allowing to write

 x ( t ) 
u ( t )  dd ( t ) , U  Dd , x ( t )   L 
 xC ( t ) 
 Vg 

0 
0
2 
 D d R 

,
X 
A

,
off
0  1 
Vg 


RC 

 D d 
1 

 
1
0
L
Aon  
 , Buon  Buoff   L 
 
1  1 
0
 C

RC 

(3)



2 Converter modeling

xL



 (t )  A (t ) + Bu(t )

E ( (t ))    i (t ) Ei , C ( (t ))   i (t )C i ,

(6)

N

D ( (t ))   i (t ) Di ,
i 1

N

 i (t )  0 , i  1,...., N ,   i (t )  1
i 1



, w, 
The time dependence of variables  , u
y and
of the vector of uncertain parameters  is dropped
for sake of a simpler notation. The parameter vector
 is supposed as arbitrarily time-varying, thus
representing the uncertain parameters of the
converter for slow or fast variations, even in the case
where the parameters switch from one value to
another (instantaneous variations) or when the
parameters remain time-invariant.

(2)

where D d is the complementary operating point
duty cycle, given by D d  1  Dd . The conventional
linearization and the addition of an extra state
variable representing integral action to ensure zero
steady state error are taken into account to get the
augmented representation of the system

3 Robust state feedback H2 control
The boost converter shown in Figure 1 is now used
with the parameter set presented in Table 1 in order
to design a robust controller and to experimentally
validate it.

1550

Table 1. Parameters of the boost converter.

Parameter
Vg
Vo

Dd

Value
25 V
50 V

Parameter
L
C

220 F

0.5

fs

50 kHz

0 
2 0
(13)

0  , R  10
Q  0 4
 0 0 1000000 
one has that the conditions from (9) provide the gains
K   1.0353  0.6873 316.1408
(14)
Notice that these gains ensure robust stability for
the system operating with parameters varying inside
the intervals (7). Moreover, from the choice of fixed
matrices Ei, Ci and Di in (12), one has that the
problem of H2 robust control solved here ensures the
minimization of the cost function

 
(15)
 (  Q + u Ru)dt

Value
886 F

The nominal power of the converter is 100 W.
The capacitor voltage ripple and inductor current
ripple are given respectively by 0.2 and 15.
The parameters R, Dd and Vg are considered
varying arbitrarily inside the intervals
R 18.75 , 50 , D d 0.4 , 0.6, Vg 22 , 48 (7)
which yields a polytopic representation with matrices
given in (6). This polytopic model is generated as in
(Olalla et al., 2009), including here Vg as another
independent uncertain parameter to cope with
variations on the input voltage.
In order to compute a state feedback control law
(8)
u  K

0

from the linear quadratic control problem, which can
be seen as a special case of the H2 control problem
given here. However, the control designer can choose
each one of the matrices Ei, Ci and Di independently,
leading to another controller that would still
minimize the H2 guaranteed cost under quadratic
stability. Finally, another interpretation of the
resulting controller is that in the case where the
disturbances are independent zero mean unit variance
white noises with power spectral density equal to
identity, the RMS value of the output is minimized
under quadratic stability. This means optimal
rejection of disturbances to the output ensured by the
proposed H2 control approach.

ensuring robust stability and performance under
arbitrary parameter variation, the standard H2
guaranteed cost control under quadratic stability is
used (Geromel et al., 1992).
System (5) is stabilizable by means of the control
law (8) if there exists a solution for the convex
optimization problem

min

X  X ,Z ,W W >0

Tr ( X )

s.t

X
CiW + Di Z 

WC + Z  D 
0
W
i
 i


4 Simulation and experimental validation
In order to evaluate the proposed controller,
simulation and experimental tests are performed. The
output of the system is the voltage across the load
(vo). The following tests verify the robustness to load
variation and to input variation, as well as allow to
observe the transient and steady state behavior of the
converter when operating in open-loop and in closedloop with the proposed controller. In the tests for
load variation, the load switches from one resistor of
50 to the parallel association of 30 and 50 and
in the tests for input voltage variation, the input Vg is
varied in the interval (7). The control implementation
is analog, using standard operational amplifier
circuitry.

(9)

 AiW + WAi + Bi Z + Z  B2i  Ei 
0

Ei 
 I 

i  1,...., N
In this case,

K  ZW 1

(10)

ensures robust stability in the presence of parameter
variation and
(11)
  min Tr ( X )
is the optimal H2 guaranteed cost under quadratic
stability.
This is a well known result in robust control
literature and the proof can be seen in (Geromel et
al., 1992).
Using the system parameters given in Table 1
and the intervals given in (7), and choosing the
matrices

 Q
031 
Ei  I 33 , Ci  
 , Di    ,
 R
01x 3 

4.1 Open-loop responses
First, in order to show the limitations of the
open-loop responses, the output voltage is shown for
a disturbance in the input voltage in Figure 2
(simulation result) and Figure 3 (experimental result).
For this test, the duty cycle was set at 0.4. As
expected, the perturbation on the input voltage
appears directly on the output.
Figures 4 and 5 show respectively the simulation
and experimental results for a sudden variation on the
load. The simulation and experimental results do not
match perfectly due to unmodeled dynamics but have
the same pattern, being the model used here suitable
for control design, as the results in the next
subsection demonstrate.

(12)

i  1,...., N
with

1551

4.2 Closed-loop responses

In order to have a comparison, the tests carried
out for the open-loop system are performed for the
closed-loop system.
Figures 6 and 7 show respectively the simulation
and experimental results for a disturbance on the
input voltage. It is clear the good correspondence
between simulation and experimental results.
Moreover, the good quality of the output voltage is
apparent now, when one compares Figure 7 (closedloop) with Figure 3 (open-loop). The output voltage
of the closed-loop system does not suffer significant
effects from this variation on the input.

Figure 2. Open-loop simulation result variation on the input
voltage (vg  peak value of 50 V) and resulting variation of output
voltage (vo  peak value of 84 V) for system. Scales vg 20Vdiv
and vo 20 Vdiv.

Figure 6. Closed-loop simulation result variation on the input
voltage (vg  peak value of 48 V) and resulting variation of output
voltage (vo  50 V). Scales vg 5 Vdiv and vo 2 Vdiv.
Figure 3. Open-loop experimental result variation on the input
voltage (vg  peak value of 50 V) and resulting variation of output
voltage (vo  peak value of 84 V).

Figure 7. Closed-loop experimental result variation on the input
voltage (vg  peak value of 48 V) and resulting variation of output
voltage (vo  50 V).

Figure 4. Open-loop simulation result variation on the load
current (iload with initial value of 1 A) and resulting output voltage
(vo with initial value of 50 V). Scales 2 Adiv and 5 Vdiv.

Figures 8 and 9 illustrate respectively the
simulation and experimental results for the load
variation under consideration. One can observe again
that the simulation and experimental results do not
match perfectly but have the same pattern. The most
important to mention is that the quality of the closedloop response (Figure 9) is significantly superior to
the open-loop response (Figure 5) in terms of
underovershoots, settling times and steady state
errors. Notice that figures 5 and 9 are shown with
same horizontal and vertical scales for a straight
comparison.
Figure 5. Open-loop experimental result variation on the load
current (iload with initial value of 1 A) and resulting output voltage
(vo with initial value of 50 V).

1552

Figure 8. Closed-loop simulation result variation on the load
current (iload with initial value of 1 A) and resulting output voltage
(vo with initial value of 50 V). Scales 2 Adiv and 5 Vdiv.

Figure 11. Closed-loop experimental result detail of load current
decrease (iload with final value of 1 A) and resulting output voltage
(vo with final value of 50 V). Overshoot smaller than 8 and
settling time of 6 ms.

5 Conclusion
This paper presents the development of a robust state
feedback controller for a boost converter subject to
load, operating point duty cycle and input voltage
variation. The converter is modeled using a polytopic
description to take into account parametric
uncertainty. The uncertain parameters are supposed
as arbitrarily time-varying inside given intervals. The
control gains are obtained from convex optimization
conditions for H2 guaranteed cost control under
quadratic stability and thus the closed-loop system is
stable for the entire set of uncertainties, under fast
parameter variation. Simulation and experimental
results are obtained for the converter subject to
variations on the input voltage and on the load. The
results demonstrate the robustness and good
responses of the closed-loop system. The use of less
conservative models for the uncertainty and other
optimal control techniques are under investigation by
the authors.

Figure 9. Closed-loop experimental result variation on the load
current (iload with initial value of 1 A) and resulting output voltage
(vo with initial value of 50 V).

Details of the transient response of the closedloop system are shown in figures 10 and 11 for the
sudden increase and decrease on the load,
respectively. Notice the short settling times, with low
values of undershoot and overshoot and with zero
steady state errors, proving the efficiency of the
controller.

Acknowledgements
Grants from CAPES and CNPq (research project
3072322009-3).

References
Ackkermann, J. (1993). Robust control systems with
uncertain parameters, London, Springer
Verlag.
Boyd, S., Ghaoui, L.E., Feron, E. and Balakrishnan,
V. (1994). Linear Matrix Inequalities in
System and Control Theory, Philadelphia,
PA, SIAM.
Chen, C.-T. (1999). Linear system theory and design,
New York, Oxford University Press.

Figure 10. Closed-loop experimental result detail of load current
increase (iload with initial value of 1 A) and resulting output
voltage (vo with initial value of 50 V). Undershoot smaller than
8 and settling time of 6 ms.

1553

Kassakian, J.G., Schlecht, M.F. and Verghese, G.C.
(1991). Principles of power electronics,
Reading, Mass., Addison-Wesley.
Khalil, H. K. (2002). Nonlinear systems, Upper
Saddle River, N.J., Prentice Hall.
Ogata, K. (2001). Modern control engineering,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, Prentice Hall.
Olalla, C., Leyva, R., El Aroudi, A. and Queinnec, I.
(2009). Robust LQR control for PWM
converters an LMI approach. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics
56(7) 2548-2558.

Erickson, R.W. and Maksimovic, D. (2001).
Fundamentals of power electronics,
Norwell, Kluwer Academic.
Gabe, I.J., Montagner, V.F. and Pinheiro, H. (2009).
Design and Implementation of a Robust
Current Controller for VSI Connected to the
Grid Through an LCL Filter. IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics 24(6)
1444-1452.
Geromel, J.C., Peres, P.L.D. and Souza, S.R. (1992).
H2 guaranteed cost control for uncertain
continuous-time linear systems. Systems 
Control Letters 19(7) 23-27.

1554