XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

DISCRETE-TIME CURRE T CO TROL A D ITS EFFECTS O DAMPI G OF LCL FILTERS I
PWM RECTIFIERS
CAMILA E. ALMEIDA, BRAZ J. CARDOSO FILHO
Laboratório de Aplicações Industriais, Departamento de Engenharia Elétrica, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais
Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais  31270-901
E-mails camila@cpdee.ufmg.br, cardosob@ufmg.br

Abstract
 The required damping in LCL filters of PWM rectifiers is usually obtained through addition of resistors (passive
damping), although active damping via control loops is also proposed in the literature. The former solution has the disadvantage
of compromising the overall converter efficiency, while the latter requires wide bandwidth and adds complexity in the rectifier
controls. It has been recently reported in the literature that the discrete-time nature of the PWM may be used to add damping to
the closed-loop filter dynamics. In this paper, this issue is addressed to clarify the possibilities of including the sampling frequency among the filter design parameters. Analytical discrete-time models of the LCL filter including the current control loop were
developed and are presented here to support this study. It is shown that the introduction of extra damping provided by the appropriate selection of the sampling frequency enables significant reduction in the need of passive damping and the consequent
losses, enhancing the overall rectifier efficiency for the same filter dynamics.
Keywords
 Discrete-Time Systems, Dynamic Response, LCL Filter, Signal Sampling, Stability.
Resumo
 O requerido amortecimento em filtros LCL utilizados em retificadores PWM é geralmente obtido através da adição
de resistores (amortecimento passivo), apesar de o amortecimento ativo através de malhas_de_controle também ser proposto na literatura. A primeira solução tem a desvantagem de comprometer a eficiência global do conversor, enquanto que a segunda requer
larga faixa de passagem e acrescenta complexidade ao controle do retificador. Recentemente foi relatado na literatura que a natureza em tempo_discreto do PWM pode ser utilizada para acrescentar amortecimento  dinâmica de malha_fechada do filtro. Neste
artigo, esta questão é abordada para esclarecer as possibilidades de se incluir a frequência de amostragem entre os parâmetros de
projeto do filtro. Modelos analíticos em tempo_discreto do filtro LCL incluindo a malha_de_controle_de_corrente foram desenvolvidos e são apresentados para apoiar este estudo. Mostra-se que a introdução de amortecimento extra fornecido pela seleção apropriada da frequência de amostragem permite redução significativa na necessidade de amortecimento passivo e nas perdas conseqentes, aumentando a eficiência global do retificador para uma mesma dinâmica do filtro.
Palavras-chave
 .

1

pendent on the grid-side impedance (Gabe, et al.,
2009) and are subjected to parametric the uncertainties.
Cardoso Filho (2004) and Liserre, et al. (2005)
reported the observation of a correlation between the
changes in closed-loop filter damping and changes in
the sampling frequency. The authors reported that for
a given damping resistor, the system became marginally stable as the sampling frequency was increased,
although the current controller proportional gain was
inversely proportional to the sampling interval T.
However, no analytical or quantitative analysis of the
phenomenon was presented and no practical application of this discrete-time induced damping was proposed. This effect is again pointed out by Dannehl, et
al. (2009), where the system stability is studied for
different resonance and switching frequencies ratios
and a range for the control frequency is determined
from observation of various scenarios. In the latter
work, the increase in damping was attributed to copper and iron (frequency-dependent) losses on the
inductors however the same results were observed in
simulations considering ideal components. This extra
damping that correlates to the decrease of sampling
or control frequency potentially allows a significant
reduction on damping resistor losses, leading to an in-

Introduction

Voltage-source converters (VSC) are largely
employed as active rectifiers, to impose sinusoidal
mains current and reduce the total_harmonic_distortion (THD) in order to comply with international
standards. To achieve this goal, switching frequency
harmonics have to be filtered and often high order
filters are used (Liserre, et al., 2005). Employing
LCL filters to reduce the harmonic content of current
injected in the mains by inverters, as exemplified in
Figure 1, is justifiable when dynamic performance
and international standards requirements cannot be
met simultaneously using only a simple L filter
(Gabe, 2009). The trade-off is the susceptibility of
the third order filter to high order harmonics around
its resonance frequency, which lead to undesirable
oscillations, so the filter must be properly damped.
The passive approach, although simple, introduces
losses and compromises the overall system efficiency. Active damping methods make the control strategy more complex, require wider controls bandwidth
and often require extra sensors, in addition to the
standard converter output current measurement ones,
reducing the overall reliability of the converter and
adding cost. Also, active damping methods are de-

2824

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

Leq 

L1 L2
L1 + L2

(4)

From this second order section representation,
the damping ratio  can be defined by (5)
Figure 1. Inverter connected to the grid through LCL filter.

 

crease in efficiency without increasing component
count or the control algorithm complexity.
Liserre, et al. (2002a) observed a reduction of
50 of the damping resistor value was reported, as
time delays were introduced in the control loop. Such
results are quite encouraging and point out the need
to further understand this damping term originated in
the discrete time current control in LCL filters.
A detailed study on the origin of discrete damping is presented in following sections and closed loop
models of the system are developed. The correlation
between sampling time, damping resistor and stability is observed in the z-plane and the time domain.
Reduction in filter losses is estimated for some
switching frequencies.

Rd  Rd e T sin( d T )

where,



Rd
L eq

(3)

(7)

d  o 1  

(8)

where d is the damped resonant frequency.
Thus, it is possible to calculate the sampling interval which provides the most damped system, for
given filter parameters and the control frequency
range defined by Dannehl, et al., (2009).
To understand how the current control loop affects the filter dynamics, the block diagram of the
discrete-time representation of the LCL filter, without the damping resistor, shown in Figure 4, is compared to the open-loop diagram. In this figure, the
blocks that result from the discrete-time current control are highlighted. An important result is the appearance of the blocks dependent on Ra (proportional
gain in i1 control loop) affecting both vc(k) and i2(k).
These blocks essentially model the origins of the
discrete-time related damping term.

(1)

(2)

(6)


d

cot( d T ) 

s2 +

1
CLeq

(5)

The exponential decay apparently suggests that
the increase of T will reduce the equivalent resistor,
thus decreasing damping. However, this expression
presents a local maximum, given by (7)

Figure 2 presents the per phase block diagram of
a LCL filter and the rectifier current control loop, in
which only a proportional gain, Ra, is considered and
a damping resistor is inserted in the capacitive
branch. The feedback loop involves only the measurement of the converter-side current, i1 and the
modulator dynamics is modeled as a zero-order hold.
The delays introduced by digital signal processing is
omitted in the figure, but accounted for in the simulations. In continuous-time, the filter open-loop transfer function is given by (1).

o 

C
Leq

The discrete-time representation of the filter is
shown in Figure 3, where T is the sampling interval
and o is the natural frequency, defined by equation
(2). Multiple new blocks now link the state variables
and inputs of the system, the ones presenting the
damping ratio explicitly being depicted in light gray.
It is noticed that in all these blocks, the resistor Rd is
scaled by a factor dependent of the sampling time,
given in (6).

2 LCL Filter Discrete-Time Model

Rd
1
s+
I1 (s)
L
CL 2
1

 2 2
Vi (s) L 1s s + 2s +  o

Rd
2

Figure 2. Block diagram of passive damped LCL filter.

2825

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

Figure 3. Discrete block diagram of the closed loop system with damping resistor.

2826

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

Figure 4. Discrete block diagram of the closed loop underdamped system.

The similarity of the block diagrams in figures 3
and 4 is a clear indication and mathematically demonstrates that the discrete time control of current i1
potentially provides damping of the same nature as
the physical resistor Rd.
In order to increase damping, the highlighted
blocks in Figure 4 must have the same signal of those
highlighted in Figure 3, so the damping effect of
proportional gain Ra will be added to that of resistor
Rd. The blocks linking i1(k) to vc(k) and i2(k) present
the correct signal for all T. However, the block linking i1(k) to i1(k+1) will present the correct signal if

L2
sin( oT ) +  oT
L1
>0
Ra
 o ( L1 + L2 )
T >

3 Computation Results
To demonstrate how the highlighted terms are
related to damping, the filter was simulated, considering the values of L1, L2 and C listed in Table 1 and
the calculation of proportional gain proposed by
Liserre, et al., (2002b). According to this reference,
in order to achieve optimum dynamic response, the
current control gain, Ra, must be calculated according to the symmetrical optimum concept, as described by Leonhard (2001). Also, modulation and
control processing are modeled as a unit delay.
Therefore in the following analysis the switching and
sampling frequencies are the same, which is common
practice in commercially available equipment. It
should be observed, however, that reduced switching
frequency results in higher current ripple which, in
turn, demands higher inductance values.

(9)

L2
L1 o

Equation (9) establishes a restriction regarding
the minimum sampling period, for given filter parameters. Alternatively, once the control frequency is
determined, according to restriction imposed by (7),
equation (9) can be used as another design criterion
to select the value of L1, L2 and C.
For the filter parameters listed in Table 1, the
minimum T is 107s, limiting the sampling frequency to 9.3 kHz. The sampling interval which would
maximize damping, calculated using equation (6), is
371 s, corresponding to a control frequency of 2.7
kHz. Since choosing a sampling frequency lower
than two times the resonant frequency (2.5 kHz)
would cause the system to be unstable, the maximum
sampling interval possible should be selected so the
effect of closed loop damping is maximized.

Figure 5. Position of complex poles on z-plane varying with
increasing (arrow direction) sampling period.

2827

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

Table 2. Minimum resistor values for stability and desired damping, according to sampling period.

Thus, the minimum sampling frequency is determined by the maximum series impedance permissible, given by summing inductors L1 and L2.
Figure 5 shows the evolution of complex poles
with the increase of the sampling period T, as indicated by the arrows. Although the damping resistor is
kept constant (Rd  10), the poles move along both
the frequency and damping axes, starting from the
stability border at 100 s and reaching maximum
damping ratio at T  200 s. Figure 6 shows the
same for changes in the damping resistor Rd.
It is observed that the minimum resistor needed
to place the poles inside the unit circle and the resistor value to reach a desired damping ratio (in this
case, 0.2) both decreased as T was increased. Table 2 summarizes these observations, including the
estimated reduction in filter losses.

L1
L2
C
Rd
fs (switching frequency)
fo (resonant frequency)

3 mH
5 mH
2,2 F
10 
5 kHz
2.48 kHz

Rd
(0,2)

Losses
(0,2)

100 s
125 s
150 s
175 s
200 s

10,2 
7,3 
4,4 
1,9 
0,1 

30,3 
24,5 
19,3 
15,0 
11,7 

9,04 W
7,31 W
5,76 W
4,47 W
3,49 W

Table 3. Prototype Parameters.

Table 1. Filter Parameters.

Value

Minimum Rd
(stability border)

Experimental results are expected from a 10 kW
 220 V three-phase PWM rectifier connected to the
grid through a filter designed according to criterions
described by Liserre, et al. (2005), in order to further
validate these conclusions. The filter parameters in
this prototype are listed in Table 3. The overall reduction in losses will be measured and compared to
the estimations presented above. A complete set of
experimental results is expected to be provided in
future papers, in order to validate the analytical models presented.

Figure 6. Position of complex poles on z-plane varying with
increasing (arrow direction) damping resistor.

Component

Sampling
period (T)

Component

Value

L1
L2
C
Rd
fs (switching frequency)
fo (resonant frequency)
En (nominal voltage)
In (nominal current)

340 H
940 H
30 F
2
5 kHz
1.83 kHz
220V
26A

4 Conclusions
The discrete-time nature of the PWM rectifier controls interferes with the dynamic behavior of its sinusoidal LCL filter, increasing the filter closed-loop
damping.

These results are also observable in the filter
time response, which was simulated using SimulinkMATLAB. Figure 7, 8, 9 and 10 show the inverter output current waveform when the filter resonance frequency is excited via the grid voltage, with
sampling intervals of 125s, 150s, 175s and
200s with Rd  2. A total variation of the resonant
peak of about 80 is observed, although the damping resistor value was not altered. It is also observed
that for sampling times equal or less than 150 s the
system becomes unstable, requiring the damping
resistor to be increased, which will increase losses
and reduce filter effectiveness.
Figure 7. Inverter output current waveform and spectrum for T 
125 s.

2828

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

Figure 8. Inverter output current waveform and spectrum for T 
150 s.

Figure 10. Inverter output current waveform and spectrum for T 
200 s.

This phenomenon is related to the delay introduced in the current loop by the converter processing
and modulation, which introduces an extra pole
which pulls unstable poles to the inside of the unit
circle. The larger interval between the switch of
inverter states results in higher current and more
effective controller action.
Observation of the open and closed loop models
of the damped and underdamped filter in discrete
time provides new design criterions for the filter
components and to selection of the control frequency, in order to maximize the extra damping introduced by discrete-time closed-loop operation.
Simulation of the rectifier with ideal components
(no inherent resistances represented) demonstrates
that by proper selection of the current control sampling frequency it is possible to reduce significantly
the damping resistor losses to about 50 and still
obtain the desired dynamic response while improving
the overall rectifier efficiency, without additional
measurements or complex active damping controlbased strategy.
This means that through the use of passive
damping combined with proper sampling frequency
selection leads to a low cost solution to the LCL
filter damping, from the perspective of hardware and
software complexity as well as energy consumption.

Furthermore, the developed filter models will be
used to establish which filter design accentuate the
discrete damping, in order to maximize system efficiency.
References
Cardoso Filho, B.J. (2004). Conexão de Unidades de
Geração Distribuída ao Sistema Elétrico.
Relatório Técnico CEMIG, Belo Horizonte MG.
Dannehl, J Wessels, C. and Fuchs, F.W. (2009).
Limitations of Voltage Oriented PI Current
Control of Grid-Connected PWM Rectifiers.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics,
Vol. 56, No. 2, pp. 380-388.
Gabe, I.J Montagner, V.F. and Pinheiro, H. (2009).
Design and Implementation of a Robust Current
Controller for VSI Connected to the Grid. IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics, Vol. 24, No.
6, pp. 1444 and Piotrovsky, 1970, L., Electrical
1452.
Leonhard, W. (2001). Control of Electrical Drives.
Berlin, Germany.
Liserre, M DellAquila, A. and Blaabjerg, F., June
2002. Stability Improvements of an LCL-Filter
Based Three Phase Active Rectifier. Power
Electronics Specialists Conference, IEEE 33rd
Annual Volume, Vol. 3, pp. 1195-1201.
Liserre, M. DellAquila, A. and Blaabjerg, F.,
October 2002. Design and Control of a ThreePhase Active Rectifier Under Non-Ideal
Operating Conditions. Conference Record of the
Industry Applications Conference, 37th IAS
Annual Meeting, Vol. 2, pp. 1181-1188.
Liserre, M. Blaabjerg, F. and Hansen S. (2005).
Design and Control of an LCL-Filter-Based
Active Rectifier. IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, Vol. 41, No. 5, pp. 1942-1948.

Figure 9. Inverter output current waveform and spectrum
for T  175 s.

2829