Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

IMPACT OF ANTI-ALIASING FILTER AND MIMIC FILTER ON DIGITAL
PROTECTION RELAYING
Joao Tiago Campos, Washington Neves, Damasio Fernandes Jr., Flavio Costa



Post-Graduate Program in Electrical Engineering - PPgEE - COPELE

Electrical Engineering Department (DEE) Federal University of Campina Grande (UFCG) 58429-900,
Campina Grande - PB - Brazil


Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN), School of Science and Technology (ECT),
Campus Universitario Lagoa Nova, Natal - RN,Brazil CEP 59078970

Emails joao.campos@ee.ufcg.edu.br, waneves@dee.ufcg.edu.br, damasio@dee.ufcg.edu.br,
flaviocosta@ect.ufrn.br
Abstract This paper presents a study about the impact that the anti-aliasing and mimic filter have in the
digital relay response in the frequency domain. In addition, an evaluation of Butterworth filter response time is
shown. At last, a detailed analysis of the mimic filter is shown. The frequency response of the mimic filter as
well as a strategy to decrease the limitation of using fixed time constant are also evaluated in this work. For the
mimic filter evaluation, several fault simulations were performed using ATP (Alternative Transients Program)
and compared the time response between adaptive and fixed mimic filter. It is concluded that the adaptive
mimic demands high power computing and the introduced time delay on fundamental wave depends of chosen
time constant for mimic filter. From the analog filter analysis, it is concluded that the choice of the order and
cutt-off frequency of the analog filter has a large influence on the time delay introduced into the signal of the
fundamental frequency.
Keywords

Phasor estimation, Anti-Aliasing, Fourier, Wavelet, Digital Mimic Filter.

Resumo Neste artigo, o impacto do filtro anti-aliasing e do filtro mmico na resposta_em_frequencia de reles
digitais e estudado. Uma avaliacao do impacto na resposta no tempo do filtro butterworth analogico e mostrada,
bem como sao analisadas a resposta_em_frequencia e uma estrategia para diminuir a limitacao da constante de
tempo fixa do filtro mmico. Para provar os resultados para o filtro analogico, recorreu-se a computacao das
funcoes transferencia, variando os parametros de frequencia de corte e ordem do filtro, e analisou-se a influencia
na frequencia de 60 hz. No caso da analise do filtro mmico, foram feitas varias simulacoes de faltas num sistema
de potencia no ATP(Alternative Transients Program) e realizada uma comparacao de desempenho. Conclui-se
que a escolha da ordem e da frequencia de corte do filtro analogico influencia na resposta no tempo e que o
dimensionamento precisa ser executado com atencao. No que se refere a analise do filtro mmico, verificou-se que
a variante adaptativa demanda muito esforco computational e que o desempenho do filtro mmico de constante
fixa depende do valor da constante do sistema, atentando-se para o fato de que quanto maior a constante escolhida
do filtro, maior e o atraso no tempo introduzido.
Palavras-chave

.

Introduction

2008) to avoid the phenomenon of aliasing which
is influenced by the choice of the order and cutt-of
frequency chosen. The knowledge about the antialiasing filter is important to the engineer because
it introduces delays to the digital relay phasors
that can be not supported by the goals of relay
time response. However, for a good relay time response it compromises the quality of the filtered
signal and this choice of the filters parameters depends of the main goal of the project. In this
paper, it is shown the impact that the cutt-off frequency and order filter plays in the quality and
response time required.

Since, Rockefeller (1969) idealized the digital relays theoretically. Nowadays, such relays are
the most used in comparison to the electromechanical relays for power system protection for
various reasons, such as the flexibility in implementing multiple protection functions, cost,
implementation of sequence of events and oscillography, self-monitoring and self-testing and so
on (Committee, 2009).
Digital relays use analog and digital filters to
process voltage and current signals from the electrical system. The signals processed by the relay
are used, for example, to measure a trip situation
in case of fault. An important advantage of digital
relays compared to electromechanical is the possibility to compute the frequency and time response
in order to know the signal behaviour which in
electromechanical is only possible via testing.

Another important issue is the digital relay filters that can suffers with DC exponential
decay which appears in faults during the transients (Phadke and Thorp, 2008). Good digital filters most overcome the DC component, harmonics and be simple to design (E.O. Schweitzer
and Hou, 1993). Therefore, to overcome the DC
exponential decay effects in digital filters have
been proposed many papers using Kalman filter

It is well-known that the digital relay uses
an analog low-pass filter (Horowitz and Phadke,

670

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

(Girgis, 1982), using Fourier manipulations (Hart
et al., 2000 Guo et al., 2003 Kang et al., 2009) because it is well-known that the Fourier algorithm
that is more used in digital signal processing is
affected by DC exponential decay (Phadke and
Thorp, 2009). In addition, also wavelet transform does not filter the DC exponential decay
(Silva et al., 2008). The frequency response of the
Fourier and wavelet-based algorithms are showed
and clearly denotes the issue of the DC exponential decay component.
In order to overcome the drawbacks of Fourier
and wavelet-based algorithms, auxiliary filters are
needed to diminish the effects of the DC component. For this reason, Benmouyal (1995) proposes
the digital mimic filter which filter the DC component when the mimic time constant is equal to
the power system time constant.
This paper shows that the choice of the time
constant influences the performance of the digital
filters. For this reason, Silva and Kausel (2012)
proposed a filter that adaptively changes the time
constant. In this paper, the performance of the
mimic adaptive filter is compared to the mimic
filter with time constant fixed.
2

Fig. 1 depicts the Butterworth filter frequency and phase response to a 60 Hz signal varying the cuttoff frequency. The filters were compared to the five order and the sampling frequency
is 960 Hz (16 samples per cycle). To comply the
Nyquist theorem the filter must have a cutoff frequency up to 480 Hz to avoid aliasing. The module of the Butterworth anti-aliasing filter (Sedra
and Smith, 2007) is given by
1
,
H  r

1 + 2 ( )2N
p

(1)

where  is the maximal variation in the passband,
p is cuttoff frequency, N is the number of samples
per cycle and H is the filter magnitude response.

Anti-Aliasing Filters

The anti-aliasing filtering is of crucial importance in signal processing within the digital relay. Therefore, aliasing must be avoided, and the
Butterworth filters are the most used (Phadke
and Thorp, 2009) because they have passband response with constant amplitude. The anti-aliasing
low-pass filter filters the high frequency components to avoid overlapping of the spectrum with
low frequency signals, thus preventing the antialiasing. The anti-aliasing filtering is performed
before the signal sampling, and cut-off frequency
has to comply the Nyquist sampling theorem.
This ensure the reconstruction of the original signal without loss.
In the analog filters design must be considered

Figure 1 Amplitude response for a 60 Hz signal
varying the filter order.
According to Fig. 1, the fundamental frequency amplitude is dependent on the cutoff frequency adopted as well as the filter order. The
unity gain is achieved with the highest filter order
and cutt-off frequency.
Fig. 2 depicts that the lower the cut-off frequency and the higher the order of the filter more
the high-frequency signals are attenuated.

 the type of the filter (Butterworth, Elliptic,...),
 order (1 , 2 .,..),
 cutoff frequency (450 Hz, 540 Hz,...).
The answers to these three parameters will
depend on the type of performance desired for the
digital relay. Fast or quality signal? Avoid surely
almost 100, the influence of high frequency signals? These questions are answered according to
the performance that is demanded to the digital
relay, and the purpose for which it is the sampled
signal.

Figure 2 Amplitude response for a 480 Hz signal
varying the filter order.
The increasing of the filter order ensures unity
gain and greater security regarding the filtering of

671

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

high-frequency signals but introduces time delay.
However, with higher filter order and lower cutoff frequency, greater is the delay introduced in
the fundamental frequency. This behaviour is depicted in the Fig. 3.

Figure 4 Frequency response of the one-cycle
Fourier algorithm.
3.2

Wavelet-Based (WB) Algorithm

The wavelet-based algorithm proposed in Silva
et al. (2008) uses the filtering properties of the
wavelet transform combined with the properties
of the least squares filter as follows

Figure 3 Time delay in the fundamental frequency as a function of the cut-off frequency.

Y  A+ B,
For this reason, the choice of cut-off frequency
and filter order of the anti-aliasing filter will depend on the constraints introduced in the time lag
as well as the desired signal quality. A second order filter with cutoff frequency of 300 Hz could be
a good choice in relation to the delay, amplitude
and high frequency components filtering. According to the chosen parameters, this filter has a gain
amplitude at the fundamental frequency of 0.9992,
time delay of 0.76 ms and gain of 0.36 for frequencies above 480 Hz.
3

(4)

where A+ is the pseudo-inverse matrix. Combining the properties of wavelet and least squares
Y  A+ Mj X  GX,

(5)

being Mj  a matrix composed by M consecutive
rows of the matrix Mj . For more detailed of these
equations see (Silva et al., 2008).
The frequency response of the wavelet-base algorithm (Silva et al., 2008) is depicted in Fig. 5

Digital Filter Formulation and
Frequency Response

To prove the influence of DC component in the
Fourier and wavelet-based algorithms, it is shown
the frequency response using 16 samples per cycle
(960 Hz).
3.1

One-Cycle Fourier Algorithm (OCF)

The phasor for fundamental frequency is obtained
with Fourier Transform as follows
Ycp 

N
2 X
yn cos(pn),
N n1

(2)

Ysp 

N
2 X
yn sin(pn),
N n1

(3)

Figure 5 Frequency response of the wavelet-based
algorithm.
According to the frequency response shown in
Fig. 5, this algorithm is not immune to DC component although the algorithm has good response
to sub-harmonics. Therefore, the performance of
this algorithm will depend of auxiliary filters to
filter the DC exponential decay component.

where Ycp and Ysp are the Fourier series coefficients, N is the samples per cycle and   2
N , yn
is the sampled signal. For the fundamental phasor
estimation the p mus be equal to one. The Fourier
algorithm frequency response is shown in Fig. 4.
The OCF does not filter the DC offset, which is
one of the major problems of this classical algorithm.

4

Power System Modelling and Fault
Simulations

In this paper, fault simulations were performed
in a power system composed of two equivalent
sources connected through a transmission line to
prove that the time constant of the power system

672

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

is not fixed. Therefore, the power system equivalent sources were modelled with lumped parameters calculated at the frequency of 60 Hz and the
transmission line was modelled with distributed
parameters dependent of frequency and assuming
ideal transposition.
Tables 1 and 2 summarizes the system parameters, where V1 and V2 are the initial power flow
conditions in bus 1 and 2, Z0 and Z1 are the zero
and positive sources impedance, Y0 and Y1 are the
zero and positive line shunt admittance.

is the overreach experienced by the digital filter
during transients caused by the DC exponential
decay as depicted in Fig. 6.

Table 1 Sources Parameters.
Source 1
V1
Z0
Z1

Figure 6 Overshoot definition.

Source 2

1.0506 0 pu V
1.041 + i18.754 
0.871 + i25.661 

V2
Z0
Z1

0.956 10 pu
1.127 + i20.838
0.968 + i28.513

V



The digital mimic filter is proposed by Benmouyal (1995) to filter the DC exponential decay
component. In addition, when setting the time
constant in the mimic filter equal to the power
system line time constant all the DC component
will be filtered because the digital mimic filter is
derived from a RL filter that has this properties.
A detailed explanation about how the RL filter
filters the DC exponential decay can be read in
Benmouyal (1995).
This filter is important to algorithms that do
not have the ability to filter the DC component
such as 3.1 and 3.2.
In the fault simulations, the  which give the
lowest overshoot performed by the phasor estimation varies between 0 and 7 cycles as depicted in
Fig. 7. The Fig. 7 was created by an iterative
way using the OCF combined with MFI and testing varying  by 0 to 10 cycles by an interval of 0.1
for each fault, the  which gives the lowest overshoot is saved. For example, an AG fault with
mimic filter time constant set to 1 cycle experience a 5 overshoot, in the same AG fault the
mimic filter is then set to 2 cycle and experience a
6 overshoot, for this fault the ideal mimic filter
time constant is 1 cycle.

Table 2 Transmission Line Data.
Z0
Y0
Z1
Y1
length

0.053 + i1.000  km
2.293 1 km
0.098 + i0.510  km
3.252 1 km
180 km

The applied faults were summarize in table 3,
where AG, AB, ABG and ABC are respectively,
phase-ground fault, phase-phase fault, phasephase-to-ground fault and three-phase fault. Rg
is the ground resistance fault used in ground fault
types such as AG and ABG. Rab is the phasephase resistance between phase A and B used in
phase-phase faults such as AB, ABG and ABC.
Rbc and Rca were used in the ABC three-phase
faults and are respectively the phase-phase resistance between phases B and C and, phases C and
A.
Table 3 Faults data.
Fault type
angle( )

Fault inception
Fault distance (Km)

Rg , Rab , Rbc , Rac ()

5

AG, AB, ABG and ABC
0, 30, 45 , 60, 90
20, 40, 60, 80, 100,
120, 140, 160
1, 5, 10, 50, 100

Evaluation of the Mimic Filter (MFI)
performance

In this section, the importance of setting appropriately the mimic time constant ( ) is studied
and it is show the importance of using adaptive filters to overcome the problem of using a fixed time
constant. Therefore, the mimic filter with time
constant fixed is compared against the adaptive
mimic filter (Silva and Kausel, 2012) which varies
the time constant along the time. For this reason,
the parameter overshoot is used. The overshoot

Figure 7 Ideal  value.
The major limitation of the digital mimic filter is that the time constant has to be fixed but
this time constant varies with the fault location
and fault resistance as depicted in Fig. 8.
In order to overcome the problem with the
mimic filter time constant fixed, the algorithm

673

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Figure 9 Overshoot variation depending of  .
Figure 8  variation depending of faults variables.
proposed by Silva and Kausel (2012) adaptively
calculates the mimic filter time constant from the
signal samples. This algorithm needs a fault detector, which can be a limitation, to start calculate the mimic filter time constant and in the
beginning of the fault the time constant is set
to a initial value which depends of the engineer
choice. At the beginning of the fault, the adaptive mimic filter(AMF) estimates the time constant from the available samples, then when the
AMF has only samples post-fault it accurately estimates the time constant. For a more comprehensive about the steps for the adaptive time constant
calculation read Silva and Kausel (2012). In Table 4 is showed the overshoots experienced by the
Fourier and wavelet-based algorithms with adaptive mimic are close to the optimal value obtained
in 8 for the same simulated case, in this case the
power system time constant is equal to 0.75 cycles.

Figure 10 Lag introduced by the mimic filter depending of  .
In the performed simulations, it is concluded
that a value of  equal to 1 cycle results in optimal response to mimic filter because the algorithms for values smaller than 1 cycle time constant of the system experience the highest overshoot. With a choice of time constant near 1 cycle it is assured that the overshoot obtained by
fixed mimic filter is not too severe for this evaluated power system. To solve the limitation of
fixed time constant setting a mimic adaptive filter
which uses the signal samples to estimate a value
for the time constant closer to real value was proposed by Silva and Kausel (2012). Despite the
adaptive filter mimic demonstrates good results
compared to mimic without adaptive features, the
added complexity is not worth the improvements
achieved.

Table 4 Overshoot experienced for  power system equal to 0.75 cycles
Filters
 0.7500
Fourier + adaptive mimic
Wavelet-Based + adaptive mimic

0.7280
0.8713

Fig. 9 depicts that the overshoot experienced
by the mimic filter depends on the chosen  , in this
case the power system time constant is 1.2 cycles.
This figure show the concerns about which time
constant is more suitable for the digital mimic filter, using the adaptive mimic filter this issue disappears.
Fig. 10 depicts that increasing the  , more
higher is the time delay introduced in the signal by
the mimic filter which is undesirable. Therefore,
the choice of time constant is to be made careful
and it has to be set to a recommended value of
0.75-1.25 cycles.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, the impact of the anti-aliasing filters in digital relaying is shown as well as the
issue about how to optimal set the mimic filter
time constant. It is concluded that the choice of
anti-aliasing filter has to be carefully and depends
of goals of the project. A compromise has to be
achieved between signal quality and time delay.
In addition, a study about the variation of the
power system time constant and their concerns in
digital filtering are shown. The mimic filter with
fixed time constant is compared with a adaptive

674

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

mimic filter using various fault simulations. It
is concluded if the time constant of the digital
mimic filter is setting to one cycle of the power
system the impact of the DC component is minimized.Therefore, if a more reliable phasor value is
needed the adaptive mimic filter is the best solution.

Rockefeller, G. (1969). Fault protection with a
digital computer, Power Apparatus and Systems, IEEE Transactions on PAS-88(4) 438
464.
Sedra, A. and Smith, K. (2007). Microeletronica,
PRENTICE HALL BRASIL.
Silva, K. M. and Kausel, B. F. (2012). On combining wavelet-based designed filters and an
adaptive mimic filter for phasor estimation in
digital relaying, Electric Power Systems Research 92(0) 60  72.

Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank to CAPES and
CNPq for the financial support.

Silva, K., Neves, W. and Souza, B. (2008). Distance protection using a novel phasor estimation algorithm based on wavelet transform,
Power and Energy Society General Meeting Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy
in the 21st Century, 2008 IEEE, pp. 1 8.

References
Benmouyal, G. (1995). Removal of dc-offset in
current waveforms using digital mimic filtering, Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on
10(2) 621 630.
Committee, P. S. R. (2009). Understanding
microprocessor-based technology applied to
relaying, Technical report, Power System Relaying Committee.
E.O. Schweitzer, I. and Hou, D. (1993). Filtering for protective relays, WESCANEX 93.
Communications, Computers and Power in
the Modern Environment. Conference Proceedings., IEEE, pp. 15 23.
Girgis, A. (1982).
A new kalman filtering
based digital distance relay, Power Apparatus
and Systems, IEEE Transactions on PAS101(9) 3471 3480.
Guo, Y., Kezunovic, M. and Chen, D. (2003).
Simplified algorithms for removal of the effect of exponentially decaying dc-offset on
the fourier algorithm, Power Delivery, IEEE
Transactions on 18(3) 711  717.
Hart, D. G., Novosel, D. and Smith, R. A. (2000).
Modified cosine filters.
Horowitz, S. and Phadke, A. (2008). Power System Relaying, RSP, Wiley.
Kang, S.-H., Lee, D.-G., Nam, S.-R., Crossley, P.
and Kang, Y.-C. (2009). Fourier transformbased modified phasor estimation method
immune to the effect of the dc offsets, Power
Delivery, IEEE Transactions on 24(3) 1104
1111.
Phadke, A. and Thorp, J. (2008). Synchronized Phasor Measurements and Their Applications, Power Electronics and Power Systems, Springer.
Phadke, A. and Thorp, J. (2009). Computer Relaying for Power Systems, Wiley.

675