A NEUTRAL POINT CLAMPED MULTILEVEL RECTIFIER FOR GRID CONNECTED WIND
ENERGY SYSTEM
FRANCISCA L. C. PIRES, FERNANDO L. M. ANTUNES, DEMERCIL S. OLIVEIRA JR.
Grupo de Processamento de Energia e Controle, Depto. de Engenharia Elétrica, Universidade Federal do
Ceará
Caixa Postal 6001, 60455-760, Campus do Pici, Fortaleza, CE, Brasil
E-mails franciscalivia@yahoo.com.br, fantunes@dee.ufc.br,
demercil@dee.ufc.br
Abstract
 In this paper a neutral point clamped converter is used as a machine side converter in a wind energy conversion system.
This converter was used as a rectifier. For the rectifier operation was developed a maximum power point tracker control, without
speed sensors, associated to a power factor control, using a one cycle control technique. Simulation results are presented to access the
performance of the NPC rectifier along with the PFC and MPPT strategies.
Keywords
 Rectifier, neutral point clamped, wind energy system, one cycle control, maximum power point tracking.
Resumo
 Neste artigo um conversor do tipo neutral point clamped é utilizado como conversor no lado da máquina em um sistema
de conversão de energia_eólica. Este conversor foi implementado como um retificador. Para a operação do retificador foi desenvolvido
um controle rastreador do ponto de máxima_potência, sem a necessidade de sensores de velocidade, associado a um controle de correção_de_fator_de_potência utilizando a técnica de controle_de_um_ciclo. Resultados de simulação são apresentados para comprovar o desempenho do retificador NPC com as estratégias de PFC e MPPT escolhidas.
Palavras-chave
 .

1

Multilevel converters have become popular in the
last years due to advantages at medium and high
voltage applications. Three-level converters are the
most popular because of their simplicity and efficiency.
Advantages of multilevel converters include good
power quality, good electromagnetic compatibility
(EMC), low switching losses, and high voltage capability. The main disadvantages of this topology
are that a larger number of semiconductor switches
are required and the voltage on the DC side must be
supplied by a capacitor bank with several capacitors
or by several isolated voltage sources (Corzine,
2003).
This paper presents a three-level neutral point
clamped converter (NPC) in a back-to-back conversion system for wind generators connected to the
grid. The NPC converter was designed to operate as
the machine side converter. For efficient operation is
required for the converter a power factor control
(PFC) and a MPPT.
For extracting the optimum power from the wind, a
simple MPPT strategy is used without the knowledge of the turbine parameters (Reis et. al., 2007).
The power factor correction uses the principle of on
one-cycle control with a simple sine-triangle modulation (Bento, 2009). Simulation results are presented to access the performance of the NPC rectifier
along with the PFC and MPPT strategies.

Introduction

The development of renewable energy sources
has attracted considerable interest in recent years.
Several techniques have been used for connecting
these sources to the electrical grid.
Currently, obtaining electricity from the wind offers
the cheapest economic perspectives of renewable
energy sources. Wind generators integrated with
power electronic interfaces are becoming popular
due to their capability of extracting optimal energy
capture (Raju et. al., 2003).
The wind conversion systems could use fixed or variable speed turbines and different kinds of generators (squirrel cage induction, wound rotor induction,
doubly-fed induction and permanent magnet synchronous generator). Also could present several converter topologies and different ways of doing the
interconnection, depending on generator and turbine
types (Blaabjerg et. al., 2007).
For allowing the interconnection many control techniques for the ACAC converters are applied. Basically it is necessary a rectifier with a power factor
correction capability using a PLL or another method
of control and a maximum power point tracker
(MPPT) to allow the maximum power extraction
from the turbines, a DC link which voltage can be
controlled by the rectifier or the inverter, a DC-AC
converter with the control of active and reactive
power injected in the grid.

1583

Therefore, multilevel converters are very useful in
medium and high voltage systems.

2 Wind Energy Conversion System
The configuration chosen for interconnection
with the grid is shown on Figure 1. This configuration corresponds to a generator directly connected to
the grid through a back-to-back ACAC converter
(Blaabjerg et. al., 2007). In this concept the generator is completely decoupled from the grid (Pereira,
2008). The energy from the generator is rectified to
a DC link, and then it is converted to a suitable AC
energy for the grid (Carrasco et. al., 2006).

Figure 2. NPC in a back-to-back conversion system.

The different proposed multilevel converter topologies can be classified in the following five categories, shown in Figure 3 (Blaabjerg et. al., 2007)
 Diode clamped

Bi-directional switch interconnection

Flying capacitors

Multiple three-phase converters
 Cascaded single phase H-bridge converters.

Figure 1. Wind energy system chosen

Each component showed in Figure 1 has its main
characteristics as following described (Blaabjerg et.
al., 2007e Carrasco et. al., 2006)
 Wind turbine capture power from the wind
and convert it to rotating mechanical power.
 The gear box can be used to convert the
low-speed, high-torque power to electrical
power, but it is not necessarily used.
 The generator can be a wound rotor synchronous generator or a permanent magnet
synchronous generator.
 A multilevel power converter topology is
used to connect the stator windings to the
grid. For this system was considered a Neutral Point Clamped (NPC) topology, which
presents a voltage with three levels.
The AC-AC converter is shown on Figure 2, in
which two NPC converters form the back-to-back
system, connected through a DC-link using two capacitor banks with the same voltage. In this work is
described only the AC-DC side and its control methods for this application. The control for the inverter side was not implemented. For this application, it
has been considered a permanent magnet synchronous generator with a rated power of 6kW.

Figure 3. Multilevel topologies a) one leg of a three-level diode
clamped converter b) one leg of a three-level converter with bidirectional switch interconnection c) one leg of a three-level flying capacitor converter d) three-level converter using three two-level converters and e) one leg of a three-level H-bridge cascaded converter.

As the ratings of the components increases and the
switching and conducting properties improve, the
advantages of applying multilevel converters become
more and more evident. The reduced content of
harmonics in the input and output voltage is highlighted, together with the reduced EMI. Moreover,
the multilevel converters have the lowest demands
for the input filters or alternatively reduced number
of switching. For the same harmonic performance as
a two level converter, the switching frequency of a
multilevel converter can be reduced to 25 that results in the reduction of the switching losses. Even
though the conducting losses are higher in the multilevel converter, the overall efficiency depends on the
ratio between the switching and the conducting
losses (Carrasco et. al., 2006).

3 Multilevel Power Converter

4 Diode Clamped Converter

In order to decrease the cost per MW and to increase the efficiency of wind energy conversion, nominal power of wind turbines has been continuously
growing in last years (Carrasco et. al., 2006). So the
interest for multilevel converters implemented in
wind energy systems has been growing. This occurs
because of the low voltage stress across the switches.

One of the multilevel structures that is widely
used is the Diode clamped converter, presented on
Figure 3(a) An n-level Diode Clamped Converter
consists of (n-1) capacitors on the DC bus, 2(n-1)
switching devices per phase and 2(n-2) clamping
diodes per phase. The DC bus voltage is split into n
levels by using (n-1) DC capacitors. Each capacitor
1584

has Vdcn volts and each voltage stress will be limited to one capacitor level through clamping diodes. Figure 4 show a three-level diode clamped converter.
The diode clamped converter has the following advantages (Pereira, 2008)
 The switch must support a voltage of only
Vdc(n-1) for a n-levels converter
 The number of capacitors in DC-link is
smaller than in others multilevel topologies
 In most cases it is not necessary a transformer

Switching losses and interferences are lower than in two level converters.
While the disadvantages are (Pereira, 2008)
 Clamped diodes must be fast recovery and
support the rated current of the converter
 Above three-levels, clamped diodes dont
support the same voltage levels. Therefore,
are used series association of diodes that increase the number of diodes
 The voltage on the capacitors must be balanced, that causes an additional problem to
the control.

and a power factor control described at the next sections.
Table 1 - Three-level NPC converter voltage levels and their switching states for phase A
Voltage Level (VAN)

Switches ON

-Vdc2
0
Vdc2

Sa3, Sa4
Sa2, Sa3
Sa1, Sa2

6 Maximum Power Point Tracker
Variations of wind on the turbine cause different
values of power generated. When this power is low
some technique must be used to take advantage of
the maximum power extracted from the turbine.
This can be done measuring the rotational speed of
the turbine and adjusting a reference signal or measuring the output rectifier power, without need
knowing any parameter of the turbine.
The method chosen for the MPPT uses the principle
of perturbation and observation. The dc-link voltage
Vdc is considered constant. The output average current Idc is measured and the power Pdc is compared
with the previous value, so a reference amplitude
signal (Vm) is changed. This signal Vm is used to
correct the switching pulses of the rectifier.
Figure 5 shows the MPPT control program flowchart
used (Reis et. al., 2007).

5 Neutral Point Clamped Converter
The topology chosen was the three-level diode
clamped converter also known as Neutral Point
Clamped converter or NPC converter. This structure
was first proposed by Nabae et. al. in 1980. Figure 4
shows this topology. The NPC topology is shown on
Figure 4.
The DC bus voltage is split into 3 levels by using 2
DC capacitors, C1 and C2. Each capacitor has Vdc2
volts and each voltage stress will be limited to one
capacitor level through clamping diodes. The phase
voltage, VAN has three states as given in Table 1
(Mailah et. al., 2009). However, the line voltage VAB
presents five-level voltage.
The mainly advantage for the NPC converter is the
reduced number of levels and semiconductors for a
good performance and low levels EMI and THD.

Figure 5.  MPPT control program.

The input current in each phase, IA, IB, and IC are
measured and compared to the variable carriers.
This MPPT calculates the output power of the generator by measuring DC link current and then perturbs the operating point by increasingdecreasing
the reference Vm shown on Figures 6 and 8.The new
value of power is then compared with the previous

Figure 4. Neutral Point Clamped topology.

This paper describes a NPC converter operating as a
rectifier for a back-to-back system. For this application was developed a maximum power point tracker

1585

value and depending upon the error, Vm magnitude
is further increased or decreased.

sign Vm is controlled by the MPPT control. Two triangular carriers are obtained using the Vm magnitude. This carries are compared to three-phase reference currents measured on rectifier input. As result,
twelve control pulses are obtained.

7 Power Factor Control
Power factor correction is performed using the
principle of one cycle control (OCC). Figure 6 shows
the schematic of the OCC control for a closed loop
operation (Bento, 2009) in one phase. The variable
Vm, in the output of the voltage regulator, define the
magnitude of the current reference and the shape
current is obtained through a principle of voltage
tracking applied, in a convenient way, to a switching
period.

Figure 7. Basic scheme of SPWM strategy for a NPC.

Figure 6. Schematic of OCC control.

Different from a conventional control with current
loop, this method needs only three sensors for the
three-phase input current and one for the DC output
voltage. There is not current control loop neither
input voltage sensor to form a current reference.
The value of the reference signal Vm on an open loop
operation is defined by

Vm 

RS Vdc
2  Re

Figure 8. Complete scheme for SPWM in the NPC rectifier.

(1)
8 Simulation Results

where Rs represents the sensor gain and Re is the
emulated resistance of the rectifier

Re 

Vg
Ig

The NPC multilevel rectifier was simulated using the PSIM software, with the parameters of Table
2. In this simulation was considered a fixed output
voltage at the DC-link.
The power generated in a wind system is variable
and depends on the wind. Therefore, simulations
were made considering the rated value of input power and lower values. To obtain different values of
power were used variances on the three-phase input
voltage.
At simulation the rectifier behavior was observed in
these different values of input voltage and current
for applying the MPPT control.

(2)

To apply the OCC technique shown on Figure 6 in
NPC rectifier it is necessary three phase reference
currents, measured on the input rectifier that are the
modulators for the Pulse Width Modulation (PWM)
and compare these modulators with variable carriers.
It was chosen the simplest modulation strategy,
SPWM (Sinusoidal Pulse Width Modulation), in
which there is no zero sequence injection and it is
equivalent to connect the load neutral and the source
neutral. Two triangular carriers are necessary one
positive and other negative. Both are compared with
the measured sinusoidal currents. This SPWM strategy scheme is shown on Figure 7 (Bento, 2009).
On figure 8, a complete scheme of this strategy is
shown, considering a fixed voltage on DC-link.
Considering a fixed DC voltage, it is not required
the voltage regulator from Figure 6. The reference

Table 2  Considerations for the NPC design

Generator rated power
Generator rated voltage
Rectifier output voltage
Rectifier efficiency
Switching frequency
Input current ripple
Output voltage ripple

1586

6 kVA
220 V
800 V
0.97
10 kHz
1.82 A
20 V

For the simulation with rated values, the converter
presented a total_harmonic_distortion (THD) equal to
3.92 and a power factor equal to 0.9976.
Figure 9 shows the results for rated conditions.
Three-phase current assume the expected peak value
of 12.85 A. Input voltage and current in each phase
presents almost the same angle. The power factor
was calculated for the software and is also showed
on Figure 9.
Figure 10 shows the rectifier output average current
and the input current in one phase after a step on the
input voltage (from 220 to 110V). Without the
MPPT method input current and average output current decrease to almost a half of their rated values.
Using a MPPT method these currents increase to
values next to the rated ones.

used. The simulation considered variable voltage
and frequency source, obtaining a maximum extracted power with a unity power factor and a low
THD value. The laboratory prototype is still under
developed and the experimental results will be obtained soon to confirm the simulation results.
Acknowledgement
The authors thank to CNPq for the financial support
and incentive to scientific research, the GPEC for
the technical support and all the professors and students who contributed with this work.
References
Bento, A. A. M (2009). A Técnica de Controle de
um Ciclo Aplicada  Correção do Fator de
Potência com Retificadores Boost. Doctorate
thesis in electrical engineering, Federal
University of Campina Grande.
Blaabjerg, F. and Iov F (2007). Wind Power - a
Power Source Now Enabled by Power
Electronics. 9th Brazilian Power Electronics
Conference, 2007, Blumenau.
Carrasco, J. M Galvin, E Portillo, R Franquelo, L.
G. and Bialasiewicz, J. T (2006). Power
Electronic Systems for the Grid Integration of
Wind Turbines. IECON 2006 - 32nd Annual
Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics,
ISSN 1553-572X , pp 4182  4188.
Corzine, K (2003). Operation and Design of
Multilevel Inverters. University of Missouri 
Rolla. Developed for the Office of Naval
Research.
Raju, A. B Fernandes, B. G. and Chatterjee, K
(2003). A Simple Maximum Power Point
Tracker for Grid connected Variable Speed
Wind Energy Conversion System with Reduced
Switch Count Power Converters. Power
Electronics Specialist Conference. PESC 03.
IEEE 34th Annual, Vol. 2, pp. 748-753.
Mailah, N. F Bashi, S. M Aris, I Mariun, N
(2009)
Neutral-Point-Clamped
Multilevel
Inverter Using Space-Vector Modulation.
European Journal of Scientific Research, ISSN
1450-216X, Vol.28, No.1, 2009, pp.82-91.
Pereira, I. F. B. F (2008). Projectar, Simular e
Implementar um Inversor Multinível. Masters
degree dissertation in electrical engineering,
University of Porto.
Reis, M. M Nascimento, R. M.G Soares, B. L
Fava, S. A. M Freitas, E. M Silva, C. E. A.
and Oliveira, D. S (2007). A Grid Connected
Variable Speed Wind Energy Conversion
System. 9th Brazilian Power Electronics
Conference, 2007, Blumenau.

Figure 9. Line currents in a, b and c phases (above) and voltage and
current in one phase (below).

Figure 10. Current of phase A and average output current without
MPPT (above) and with MPPT (below).

9 Conclusion
This paper has presented a multilevel rectifier for
wind generation systems connected to the grid. This
rectifier was simulated with MPPT and PFC control.
The MPPT was implemented only by measuring
turbine output power, without the knowledge of
wind turbine parameters, and the PFC control without a current loop. The results showed the effectiveness of the converter topology and control strategy

1587