XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

HEALTH MONITORING OF AIRCRAFT HORIZONTAL STABILIZER SYSTEMS
USING STATISTICAL PROCESS CONTROL TECHNIQUES
Yuji W Nakahati, Bruno P Leao, Roberto K. H. Galvao


Av. Brigadeiro Faria Lima, 2170, Putim
EMBRAER, Empresa Brasileira de Aeronautica S.A.
Sao Jose dos Campos, Sao Paulo, Brasil


Praca Marechal Eduardo Gomes, 50 - Vila das Acacias
ITA, Instituto Tecnologico de Aeronautica
Sao Jose dos Campos, Sao Paulo, Brasil

Emails yuji.nakahati@embraer.com.br, bruno.leao@embraer.com.br, kawakami@ita.br
Abstract Univariate Statistical Process Control (SPC) has been extensively employed in industry for fault
detection and product quality control. However, for complex systems, better results have been obtained by the
use of more elaborate Multivariate Statistical Process Control (MSPC) techniques. This paper proposes the use of
MSPC techniques (Hotelling T2 and Runger U2 statistics) for health monitoring of an aircraft horizontal stabilizer
system. For illustration, these techniques are applied in a simulated case study representing a degradation scenario
with progressive increase in friction. For comparison, univariate SPC is also employed. The results indicate that
MSPC provides earlier indications of degradation as compared to univariate SPC. The best results are obtained
by using the Runger U2 statistic.
Keywords Multivariate Statistical Process Control, Early Fault Detection, Hotelling T2 , Runger U2 , Aircraft Horizontal Stabilizer.
Resumo Controle Estatstico de Processo (CEP) Univariavel tem sido amplamente utilizado na industria
para identificacao de falhas e controle de qualidade. Entretanto, para sistemas_complexos, a utilizacao de tecnicas
mais elaboradas tais como Controle Estatstico de Processo Multivariavel tem apresentado melhores resultados.
Este trabalho sugere a utilizacao de tecnicas de CEP Multivariavel tais como Hotelling T2 e Runger U2 para
o monitoramento da saude de um sistema de estabilizador_horizontal_de_aeronaves. Para estudar tais tecnicas,
foi realizado um estudo de caso simulado representando um cenario de degradacao por meio do aumento do
atrito do sistema. O CEP Univariavel tambem foi aplicado a fim de se comparar as metodologias. Os resultados
demonstraram que os metodos CEP Multivariavel identificaram as falhas de forma mais rapida que o metodo
Univariavel. Especificamente, a tecnica Runger U2 apresentou o melhor desempenho.
Palavras-chave 

1

For decades, quality control in different types
of industries has been an important topic. For
this purpose, several techniques with the capability of improving product quality have been studied
over the years. In the 1930s, Statistical Process
Control (SPC) was developed from the work performed at Bell Labs and Western Electric (Box
et al., 2005). This technique consists of the identification of deviations through comparison between
a quality control index and thresholds defined on
a statistical basis. Univariate charts, such as Shewhart charts, can be used to monitor quality variables in order to detect the occurrence of such deviations (Shewhart, 1931). SPC has also been applied to non-industrial processes such as sales and
logistics control (Scordaki and Psarakis, 2005).

Introduction

Maintenance costs are currently one of the most
relevant items in aircraft operators budgets. For
this reason, methods for incipient failure identification, health monitoring and failure prognostics have been under focus in order to avoid
unscheduled maintenance tasks and to provide
means for transitioning from Reliability Centered
Maintenance (RCM) to Condition Based Maintenance (CBM). Besides reducing maintenance
costs, such methods have the potential to reduce
operational costs (reducing flight delays and cancelations) and even cut spare parts and logistics
costs (Leao et al., 2009). Therefore, terms such as
Prognostics and Health ManagementMonitoring
(PHM) and Integrated Vehicle Health Management (IVHM) are becoming increasingly popular in aerospace industry and scientific community (Bizarria and Yoneyama, 2009), (Smith et al.,
2009). The present work describes the development of a health monitoring solution based on
Multivariate Statistical Process Control (MSPC)
techniques that can be applied in real aircraft providing benefits such as the ones described above.

However, such univariate SPC techniques assume that the monitored variables are statistically
independent, an assumption which is often inadequate for complex systems (Kourti and MacGregor, 1995). A number of improvements on the
original SPC methods have been proposed to overcome this limitation. MSPC methods such as Hottelings T2 chart (Hotelling, 1933) and combinations with multivariate projections such as Princi-

2270

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

pal Component Analysis (PCA) have been widely
applied in various industral settings (Kourti and
MacGregor, 1995), (Kresta et al., 2009), (Kanoa
and Nakagawa, 2008).
MSPC-related methods have also been used
in aeronautical applications. These applications
range from aircraft maintenance management
(Beabout, 2003), to the monitoring of aircraft systems and structures. Examples of the latter include early fault detection for aircraft flap and
slat actuators (Leao et al., 2009) and electronic
components (Kumarm et al., 2008), structural assessment (Mujicaa et al., 2008) and monitoring of
helicopter drive systems (Mimnagh et al., 2000)
and other aircraft systems (Schimert, 2008).
The present work is concerned with an application of MSPC methods for health monitoring
of an electro-mechanical system of a commercial
aircraft. More specifically, the Hotelling T2 and
Runger U2 (Runger, 1996) statistics are employed
to detect incipient failures in a horizontal stabilizer (HSTAB) system. The methodologies are implemented and tested using a detailed simulation
model for the HSTAB system of a real aircraft.
The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows. Section 2 describes the horizontal stabilizer system, the failure modes under
consideration and the dynamic Simulinkr model
that was used for the analysis. Section 3 explains
the MSPC methods applied for health monitoring purposes. Section 4 presents the results and
related discussions. Finally, section 5 brings the
conclusions and proposals for future work.
2

Figure 1 Horizontal Stabilizer of an aircraft.
by an electro-mechanical actuator named Horizontal Stabilizer Actuator (HSA), which is controlled
by a Dedicated Electronic Controller (DEC). The
DEC drives the HSA providing functions such as
power amplification, closed loop velocity control
and failure detection.
The DEC is an electronic controller which receives the flight crew onoff command through a
switch located at the yoke and amplifies this command activating the stabilizer actuator. Closed
loop for velocity control is implemented to guarantee the required performance. The angular velocity control loop reference is a function of the
aircraft airspeed in order to provide a consistent
aircraft behavior for the whole airspeed envelope.
For higher speeds the trim rate (surface angular
velocity) is lower than that for low speeds according to figure 2.

System description

The horizontal stabilizer, figure 1, is a wing section usually located at the rear of fuselage that is
designed to provide the aircraft with stable longitudinal dynamics. Moreover, in aircraft such as
Embraer 190, Boeing 737 and Airbus 320, this surface is entirely moveable, which increases the pitch
control capability. In fact, for leveled flight it is
often necessary to command the elevators in order to compensate the natural aircraft pitch down
moment. This would require a continuous pilot
effort to command the elevators during flight. By
moving the entire horizontal stabilizer, it is possible to compensate such moment without the need
for continuous pilot inputs to the yoke, thus decreasing the pilots workload. Other relevant function of the moveable horizontal stabilizer is to keep
the elevators with full authority during the whole
flight since they are not used for compensating the
pitch down tendency. This is highly recommended
because, if the aircraft reaches an undesirable or
dangerous condition, such as stall, the pilot should
have the maximum pitch maneuver capability.
For the horizontal stabilizer system configuration considered in this work, the surface is moved

Figure 2 Trim rate schedule
The HSA is an electro-mechanical actuator
comprising a set of mechanical parts which transform motor rotation in the linear movement of a
nut through a ball screw mechanism. The HSA
uses two brushless motors which are mechanically
connected through a gearing system. The nut is
linked to the entire horizontal stabilizer surface,
which rotates around a fixed axis. The HSA also
includes a no-back mechanism which holds the sta-

2271

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

bilizer in the last commanded position and prevents the surface from back driving at high airloads. The figure 3 depicts the system architecture.

to simulate the airloads applied to the horizontal
stabilizer surface. Motor electrical current limiting and actuator position saturation nonlinearities
were included. Ground gust loads were modeled
as a function of measurable operational conditions
(gust airspeed, temperature and altitude). Sensor
measurements were corrupted with Gaussian random noise. Manufacturing tolerances were also
considered in terms of a probability distribution
of the baseline friction coefficients. In order to
cope with present technology for data recording
available onboard commercial aircraft the measurements were considered to be sampled at a
10Hz rate.

Figure 3 Horizontal Stabilizer System Architecture
One of the most relevant failure modes of the
horizontal stabilizer electro-mechanical systems is
surface jamming. This jamming may cause adverse consequences for the aircraft operation and
safety. Frequently this failure mode is a consequence of gradual mechanical components degradation, such as loss of lubricant characteristics
and the natural detrition of the mechanism, which
leads to an increment of total system friction. The
main objective of this work is to monitor this gradual degradation in order to provide early warning
so that an adequate maintenance task can be performed prior to system jam.
This work was developed on the basis of data
from a Simulinkr dynamic model of a HSTAB system, see figure 4. The model is divided in three
different parts. The first part represents the DEC
where the velocity control loop is located. The
second part includes the electro-mechanical components, such as motor, resolvers and the mechanical actuator, and also the friction model. The
third is the aircraft longitudinal model developed

Figure 4 Horizontal Stabilizer Simulinkr Model
Figure 5 presents simulated signals of motor
current, horizontal stabilizer position and velocity.
3

Health Monitoring Techniques

As described in the previous section, the DEC
drives the actuator motors at constant velocity
as a function of aircraft speed. Therefore, for a
given aircraft speed, measurements such as motor
current and position and system temperature can
be obtained from existing sensors and used to develop a statistical model. Such statistical model
built from healthy system data can be used as a

2272

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

edge of the system. Some groups of variables may
or may not be sensitive to the system degradation for the failure mode under consideration. As
discussed before, the horizontal stabilizer system
includes closed loop controllers aimed at moving
the horizontal stabilizer surface at constant velocity. Therefore, the motor angular velocity is inadequate for detection of friction increments since
the closed loop controllers will compensate for this
effect (up to a certain point). On the other hand,
the motor current or actuator input torque are
good choices since these measurements represent
the manipulated variable, which will vary as a
function of system friction. For this study, the system data is obtained from a command performed
in takeoff configuration procedure, which has the
advantage of reduced airload effects if compared
to measurements during flight. The airloads in
this case would increase the variance of the statistical model since they affect motor currents and
they are not measured.
In the case of univariate SPC, the degradation
index can be calculated by (1) using the motor
current mean value defined by (2)

Figure 5 Horizontal Stabilizer Data Simulation
standard and compared against new flight data in
order to infer the system health state.
The application of SPC methods can be divided in two major phases, namely a modeling
phase and a monitoring phase. The modeling
phase basically consists of collecting healthy system data and building the statistical model which
characterizes the system by a vector of mean values, a covariance matrix and statistical thresholds.
The monitoring phase comprises collecting new
data from the system and comparing it against the
statistical model developed in the modeling phase
using an index such as Hotelling T2 or Runger U2
statistics. The difference between the calculated
index and the threshold obtained in the modeling phase is an indicator of system health (Leao
et al., 2009). Figure 6 depicts these phases.

SP Cindex  i  I

1X
i(j)
L j1

(1)

L

i

(2)

where i(j) is the absolute value of motor current
at sample number j, L is the length of a data window acquired during the HSTAB motion and I is
the mean of i for all HSTAB motion commands. A
threshold can be defined by calculating the standard deviation  of i. By assuming a Gaussian
distribution of such values, 3 thresholds can be
employed for a 99 confidence level, for example.
However, univariate SPC can lead to erroneous detection of incipient failures since the monitored variable may vary as function of other variables such as operational or environmental conditions. For example, when the system temperature decreases two main effects occurs the lubricant viscosity increases and the bearing parts
contract. These effects may lead to increments in
system friction which are not related to system
degradation. Therefore, adopting an MSPC approach would be more adequate in this case. For
this purpose, two variables were chosen to define
the statistical model the system temperature (T )
and the average value of motor current (i), calculated as in (2) during a pre-defined time interval
of L sampling periods. Therefore, the feature vector for use in the MSPC approach was defined as
x  i T T .
In the case of Hotellings MSPC method
a mean vector  and a covariance matrix 

Figure 6 Modeling and monitoring phases.
In order to have a representative statistical
model, it is interesting to perform a selection of
the variables of interest based on a priori knowl-

2273

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

are needed to calculate the T2 degradation index (Hotelling, 1933). Given n observations
x1 , x2 , . . . , xn  of the feature vetor x under
healthy conditions,  and  can be calculated as
follows
1X
xi
n i1

(3)

1 X
(xi  )(xi  )T 
n  1 i1

(4)

As in the case of Hotellings T2 index, thresholds for U2 can be expressed in a explicit manner
as a function of the confidence level and the degrees of freedom (Runger, 1996). But again this
requires that the underlying multivariate probability distribution be Gaussian. As an alternative,
the thresholds may also be defined on the basis of
a non-parametric estimate of the probability density function (pdf). This has the advantage of
not requiring a priori assumptions on the distribution type (Leao et al., 2009). Also, if system
failure data is available, the Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) curve may be used to define the most appropriate threshold in terms of
sensitivity and false alarm rate.

n



n



The T2 statistics, which can be interpreted as a
distance of a new observation xnew with respect
to the healthy data is then defined as
T2 (xnew )  (xnew  )T 1 (xnew  )

4

(5)

Results and Discussion

In order to test the SPC and MSPC methodologies applied to the Horizontal Stabilizer System,
simulated data was generated using the Simulinkr
model described in section 2. The simulation was
performed for the on-ground condition with a 50s
step size using Runge-Kuttas solver. The output
(n  1)(n + 1)k
data was sampled at 10Hz, which is a reasonable
F (k, n  k)
(6)
tH 
n(n  k)
recording sampling rate for commercial aircraft.
In a real setting, transient effects in the initial
where k is the number of variables (in this case,
and final parts of the HSTAB motion may exhibit
two) and F (k, n  k) stands for the critical value
a large run-to-run variability, which may mask the
of the F distribution with k and n  k degrees of
presence of incipient failures. Therefore, only the
freedom for a significance coefficient .
steady state time interval (in which the motion
Other MSPC methods may be able to provelocity is approximately constant) was considvide greater sensitivity to deviations from healthy
ered. Also, the command was performed in only
behavior as compared to Hotellings T2 . One posone direction due to simplification implemented
sible improvement, originally proposed by Runger
in HSTAB Simulinkr model. Since the statistical
(Runger, 1996), is aimed at eliminating the inindexes use the absolute value of current mean,
fluence of variables that do not have direct relathis simplification does not negatively impact the
tion to the system degradation, while still takobtained results.
ing into account the influence of these variables
In order to build the statistical model for SPC
into the other variables that are directly influand MSPC methods, 1000 horizontal stabilizer
enced by degradation. The resulting statistic is
command simulations (i.e. 1000 flights) were pertermed Rungers U2 index. In the case of the horformed under healthy conditions according to the
izontal stabilizer system, the temperature should
pseudo code shown in figure 7. The overall fricbe considering in the model because it influences
tion coefficient (B) for each simulation was ranthe motor current commanded by the controller.
domly generated by considering Gaussian pdfs for
However, temperature values have no correlation
temperature and manufacturing tolerance. Figure
to system degradation.
8 show the used correlation between B and temT
Let the feature matrix x  x1 , x2 , . . . , xk 
perature for a given manufacture tolerance. The
T
T T
be partitioned as x  y
z  , where
mean and standard deviation values for temperaT
y  x1 , x2 , . . . , xj  contains the features
ture were based on a worldwide airports temperthat are sensitive to degradation and z 
ature database.
T
xj+1 , xj+2 , . . . , xk  contains those which are
The manufacturing tolerance was considered
not.
Given a new observation xnew 
through a Gaussian distribution of the nominal
T
T
T
2
ynew znew  , Rungers U statistic is defined as
friction coefficient for each different aircraft. The
2
2
T 1
U (xnew )  T (xnew )  (znew  z ) z (znew  z ) standard deviation for such distribution was set
to 10 of nominal overall friction coefficient.
(7)
Operational conditions (gust airspeed and airwhere z and z denote the mean and covariance
port altitude) were also considered in the simulaof z, which are estimated as in (3) and (4) using
tion model. For this purpose, the average and
data acquired under healthy conditions.
standard deviation for gust airspeed were set to

System monitoring is performed by comparing
the T2 index against a suitable threshold. If the
multivariate distribution of the monitored variables is Gaussian, this threshold can be calculated
as (Leao et al., 2009)

2274

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

parametric approaches. In the parametric approach, a Gaussian multivariate distribution is assumed for x and the expressions presented in Section 3 are employed. In the non-parametric approach, the threshold corresponds to the value
for which the false alarm rate (over the set of
1000 healthy simulations) is equal to . As can
be seen, the parametric and non-parametric approaches produce different results. For comparison, an equivalent jam threshold can be calculated by increasing the overall friction coefficient
until the motor stops. It was verified that this
jam threshold is considerably higher than the SPC
and MSPC thresholds, which indicates that these
methods would be able to detect incipient failures
before a jam condition occurs.

SPC
T2
U2

B Vs. Temperature

B kg.m2(sec.deg)

150

100

50

25

0
Temperature C

25

Jam
17.75
2376
2376

After the construction of the statistical models and the calculation of the threshold values, a
new set of simulations was carried out for validation purposes. These simulations were performed
for 200 hypothetical aircraft. For each aircraft,
100 simulations were carried out under healthy
conditions. For this purpose, a friction coefficient
was selected randomly and kept constant over the
100 simulations. In addition, 100 other simulations were performed using a friction coefficient
that was linearly increased from one flight to the
next (step of 0.5 B unit per flight), in order to
simulate a progressive degradation of the HSTAB
system over time according to pseudo code shown
in figure 7.
Figures 10, 11 and 12 show the time evolution
of the SPC, T2 and U2 indexes, respectively, for
a sample aircraft as well as the associated thresholds. As can be seen, the univariate SPC method
is less sensitive to the degradation, as compared
to the MSPC methods. This finding is corroborated by the results presented in Table 2, which
were generated with the thresholds obtained by
the non-parametric approach. For the evaluation
of the performance of methods, the actual failure
occurrence was considered as the point when the
overall friction coefficient becomes greater than a
threshold obtained as in non-parametric threshold calculation considering a 99 confidence level,
see figure 9. The average run length refers to the
average difference, in number of flights, between
the indication of failure and the actual failure occurrence. Correct detection and false alarm rates
were also investigated. Table 2 presents the performance summary for each method. It can be
noticed that Rungers U2 provided the best performance for all figures of merit.

Figure 7 Pseudo Code of the Simulations.

0
50

Table 1 Threshold values
Parametric Non-parametric
2.78
2.76
9.27
11.88
6.63
9.10

50

Figure 8 B and temperature correlation.
0ms and 3ms respectively. The average and
standard deviation for altitude were calculated
from real airport data, considering that the aircraft would be operating at different airports over
time.
After each of the 1000 simulations, an average
current value i was calculated as in (2) in order to
build the SPC statistical model. For the MSPC
statistical model, the temperature T was also considered in order to form a feature vector x  i T 
associated to each simulation. The mean and covariance of the feature vector were calculated according to equations (3) and (4) with n  1000.
The thresholds for SPC and MSPC (T2 and
2
U ) were obtained for a 99 confidence level (i.e.
for   0.01). Table 1 compares the threshold values calculated by the parametric and non-

2275

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

2

Actual Failure Criteria

Runger U Statistic

70
Degradation
Normal Threshold

2

50

60

40
30

U
Th par
Th nonpar

80

U2

Degradation Evolution

60

40

Different Aircraft

20

20

10
Failure
0
0

50

100
Flight

150

0
0

200

Univariate Statistic

Current Average Value

150

200

presented in Figure 13. These curves were generated by calculating the True Positive and False
Positive (or False Alarm) rates for different threshold values. As can be seen, Rungers U2 consistently presents the best performance (i.e. larger
True Positive rate for any given False Positive
rate) among the three methods.

4.5
SPC
Th par
Th nonpar

4

100
Flight

Figure 12 MSPC U2 degradation index.

Figure 9 Actual failure occurrence criteria.

3.5

50

3
2.5
2
1.5

Receiver Operating Characteristic
1

1

0.5

0.9

0
0

50

100
Flight

150

200

0.8
0.7
True Positive Rate

Figure 10 SPC degradation index.
2

Hotelling T Statistic

100
2

T
Th par
Th nonpar

80

0.6
0.5
SPC
Par Th point
Non Par Th point
T2
Par Th point
Non Par Th point

0.4
0.3
0.2

T2

60

U2
Par Th point
Non Par Th point

0.1
40

0
0

0.2

0.4
0.6
False Positive Rate

20

0
0

50

100
Flight

150

200

Figure 13
curves.

0.8

1

Receiver Operating Characteristic

Figure 11 MSPC T2 degradation index.
5
Table 2 Performance Summary.
Avr. Run
Correct
False
Length
Detection
Alarm
(Flights)
Rate() Rate ()
SPC
27.6
17.2
0.4
T2
11.4
76.5
0.7
U2
11.2
80.7
0.3

Conclusion

The present work investigated the application of
Univariate and Multivariate Statistical Processes
Control methods an aircraft Horizontal Stabilizer
System. The statistical analysis was based on
computer simulations, in which several factors
that might affect the motor current profile were
considered. The results indicated that the Runger
U2 method based on motor current and temperature information was the most effective for incipient failure detection.
Future research could investigate modifications in the fault detection logic that may lead

The superiority of Rungers U2 method in this
case study can be further illustrated by inspecting
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves

2276

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

to improvements in the performance of the MSPC
methods. For instance, debounce times could be
used to reduce the false alarm rate. In that case,
a fault would be declared only if the degradation
index remained above the threshold during a number of consecutive observations. Moreover, future
works could be concerned with the validation of
the proposed technique using real data and different types of noise distributions. Another relevant topic would be the evaluation of the proposed
methods considering different simulation models
of the dependence between temperature and friction coefficient.

Leao, B., Gomes, J., Galvao, R. and Yoneyama,
T. (2009). Aircraft flap and slat systems
health monitoring using statistical process
control techniques, Proc. IEEE Aerospace
conference pp. 18.
Mimnagh, M., Hardman, W. and Sheaffer, J.
(2000). Helicopter drive system diagnostics through multivariate statistical process
control, Proc. IEEE Aerospace Conference
pp. 1825.
Mujicaa, L., Veh, J., Ruiz, M., Verleysen, M.,
Staszewskia, W. and K.Worden (2008). Multivariate statistics process control for dimensionality reduction in structural assessment,
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing
22 155171.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by FAPESP (grant
200658850-6) and CNPq.

Runger, G. (1996). Process analysis, monitoring
and diagnosis, using multivariate projection
methods, Projections and the U2 multivariate control chart 28 313319.

References
Beabout, B. A. (2003). Statistical Process Control an application in aircraft maintenance
management, PhD thesis, Department of the
Air Force Air University.

Schimert, J. (2008). Data-driven fault detection
based on process monitoring using dimension
reduction techniques, Proc. IEEE Aerospace
Conference pp. 112.

Bizarria, C. O. and Yoneyama, T. (2009). Prognostics and health monitoring for an electrohydraulic flight control actuator, Proc. IEEE
Aerospace Conference pp. 19.

Scordaki, A. and Psarakis, S. (2005). Statistical
process control in service industry an application with real data in a commercial company,
Proc. 7th Hellenic European Conference on
Computer Mathematics and Its Applications
.

Box, G., Hunter, J. and Hunter, W. (2005). Statistics for Experimenters Design, Innovation,
and Discovery, Wiley-Interscience.
Hotelling, H. (1933). Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components,
Journal of Educational Psychology 24 498
520.

Shewhart, W. A. (1931). Economic Control of
Quality of Manufactured Product, Princeton
Van Nostrand.
Smith, M., Byington, C., Watson, M., Bharadwaj,
S., Swerdon, G., Goebel, K. and Balaban,
E. (2009). Experimental and analytical development of health management for electromechanical actuators, Proc. IEEE Aerospace
Conference pp. 114.

Kanoa, M. and Nakagawa, Y. (2008). Data-based
process monitoring, process control, and
quality improvement Recent developments
and applications in steel industry, Computers and Chemical Engineering 32 1224.
Kourti, T. and MacGregor, J. (1995). Process analysis, monitoring and diagnosis, using multivariate projection methods, Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems
28 321.
Kresta, J. V., Macgregor, J. F. and Marlin,
T. E. (2009). Multivariate statistical monitoring of process operating performance, The
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering
69 3547.
Kumarm, S., Sotiris, V. and Pecht, M. (2008).
Mahalanobis distance and projection pursuit
analysis for health assessment of electronic
systems, Proc. IEEE Aerospace Conference
pp. 19.

2277