XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

LOAD BALANCING PROCESS ANALYSIS IN LOW VOLTAGE GRID USING PETRI
NETS
Jose Ruben Sicchar, Jose Reinaldo Silva, Carlos Tavares da Costa Jr.


Universidade do Estado do Amazonas, Escola Superior de Tecnologia, Dep.Controle e Automacao
Av. Darcy Vargas,1200,Parque Dez,CEP 69050-020,Manaus, AM,Brasil


Escola Politecnica da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Dep. Mecatronica
Av. Prof. Melo Morais, CEP 5508-900, ,SP,Brazil
Butanta, Sao Paulo, SP, Brasil


ITEC-Universidade Federal do Para, Depart.Eng.Eletrica
Av. Augusto Correia,01, CEP 66075-900
Belem,PA, Brasil

Emails jvilchez@uea.edu.br, reinaldo@usp.br, cartav@ufpa.br
Abstract Recent evolution of smart_grids is causing a big demand for new operations and services, specially
to the low voltage consumers grid. Among those processes, load balancing detaches for ensuring stable states
between feeders.This paper presents some results about the design of an automated process for load balancing
feeders in final consumption units of a small urban smart_grid using a Timed Hierarchical Petri net. The main
objective is to analyze the proposed system and establish an efficient and reliable process workflow to automate
load balancing and ensure stability while minimizes intervention. As a result it improves the quality of power
service to the low voltage final consumers.
Keywords

Smart Grids, Load Balancing,Timed Hierarchical Petri Nets.

Resumo Recentemente a evolucao das smart_grids tem causado uma grande demanda de novos servicos,especialmente nos consumidores da rede de distribuicao de baixa tensao. Entre os quais, esta o processo
de balanceamento de cargas nas fases dessa rede. Este artigo apresenta os resultados da modelagem de um
processo inteligente formado por sub-processos especficos para o balanceamento de carga nas fases das unidades_consumidoras finais, de uma pequena rede_eletrica_inteligente urbana usando redes de Petri Hierarquicas
Temporizadas.O objetivo principal e analisar o sistema proposto e estabelecer um fluxo de processos eficientes
e confiaveis para o balanceamento automatico de cargas,com a finalide de garantir o equilibrio entre as fases, e
melhorar a qualidade_de_energia ao consumidor final de baixa tensao.
Palavras-chave .

1

Introduction

The perspective of having smart_grids became closer since new approaches, were developed to rely in small urban smart_grid
(SUSG)(Shahgoshtasbi and Jamshidi, 2014)or
even to mix legacy system centered in hydropower with low voltage (LV) units.
Within this focus, load balance feeders is an
important issue to the quality of energy providing service, and several direct algorithms were
proposed (Shahnia et al., 2014), (Sharma et al.,
2014),(Sicchar et al., 2015) which should now be
arranged in an automated process.
This process, forms a set for energy consumption management system (EMS) in the inner architecture of SUSG, and also forms a functional
flow for sub-processes such as the voltage evaluating stability and load imbalance into residential
feeders, Huang et al. (2015), within SG vision.
Specifically, in LV circuits is observed a problem FCU loads consumption cause imbalance
in power and electrical current between feeders, Sharma et al. (2014). It affects the stability
feeders grid, and energy quality supplied.

ISSN 2525-8311

Some possibles alternatives, as like minimization losses are being developed as the Automatic
Feeders Reconfiguration (AFR). It is applied in LV
grid and decreasing considerably the power losses
and imbalance between grid feeders, Siti et al.
(2011), Shahnia et al. (2014).
However, alternatives aforementioned have a
gap in formal modeling for load balancing system
design. They do not present workflow validation
for the AFR process, Alt et al. (2006), Wang et al.
(2015).
Therefore, we suggest the Petri nets (PN) use
to improve balancing process performance in LV
grid.That is, through formal modeling system is
possible to obtain some process that improves load
balancing efficiency. PN represent in this work the
structure and system architecture and workflow
tasks and control in system.
This article, explains in second section background the third section presents the proposal
and system modelin fourth section shows the system design in PNthe fifth section presents design
validation analysis with operational flow performance and its discussion the last section presents
the conclusion and future work lines.

3181

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

2

places.w A  1,2,3, is the weight function on the arcs.

Background

We have in this section, the background related
research line of this work.First, we have specific
review related load balancing algorithms development in LV grid. Then, we have also review about
PN use in SG. It will addressed, some specific definitions of PN that will be important for the development of this proposal.

. Definition 2.2.2.

2.1

. Definition 2.2.3.

State of Art

As load balancing method within AFR context,
we can mention the transfers overload concentrated technique (losses and loads) into specific feeder working from three-phase consumer
FCU. It is based on minimizing current consumption achieved by Fuzzy machine inference
and Newton-Rhapsons optimization algorithm,
between power consumption and power variation
in each feeder, Siti et al. (2011).
There is, another method focused only on
single-phase FCU, which minimizing power and
voltage consumption uses an hybrid genetic algorithm. In this case, also taking up load transfer but reconnecting single- phase FCU in same
feeder in grid, with lower load level, Shahnia et al.
(2014).
Also, we can mention the hybrid load
consumption algorithm model for FCU in LV
grids,based on the Unified Modeling Language
(UML)-PN paradigm, Sicchar et al. (2011), which
connects data acquisition, classification, programming and consumption forecast, and sending best
selection for arrangement switching feeders in load
balancing.
In this paper, we will continue load balancing FCU feeders model but based on hierarchical PN paradigm, using balancing diagnostic,current and load consumption prediction, minimization consumption and optimal arrangement
sequence selection flow algorithms as hierarchical
sub-processes in main PN.
Contributing, with achievement of efficient
process in load balancing, which can be used as an
alternative method andor interface in existent LV
grid and as support process in supervision center
for a small urban smart_grid (SUSG).
2.2

Definitions

. Definition 2.2.1. Petri Net.A Petri net structure is a directed weighted bipartite graph,
Silva and del Foyo (2012)
N  (P, T, A, w)

(1)

where P  is the finite set of places,P 
. T  is the finite set of transitions, T
.A(PxT)(TxP) is the set of arcs from
places to transitions and from transitions to

ISSN 2525-8311

Timed Petri Net.Defined

by
N  (P, T, A, w, M 0, f )

(2)

where (P, T, A,w,M0 ) is a marked Petri net,
Silva and del Foyo (2012),f  TR+ is a firing time function that assigns a positive real
number to each transition on the net.
Hierarchical Petri net by
Place Bounded Substitution.In a PN structure
give by
N  (P, T, F )
(3)
There is, an Y sub-net which limited
by place so the replacement of this Y
sub-net, generates another net N  (P,
T, F ), where i) P  P T S y , S y
is the new element that replaces Y 
ii)T T Y iii)F F Int(Y ),Int(Y )is the inner Y arcs set, Silva and del Foyo (2012).
3

Proposal

Aiming to improvement the load balancing process in LV grid, we propose in this article a model
of an intelligent process for FCU load feeder balancing in small urban smart_grid, using a Timed
Hierarchical Petri Net (THPN), in order to obtain reliably and efficiently workflow, formally validated.
The load balancing flow in current secondary
grid, it is not scope of this work.Through, hierarchical PN will be performed validation of a new
system design with inner sub-processes that make
feeders reconfiguration,called DPMS, which is
explained in following sub-section.At where, algorithms of each processes form a system and service
that supporting the final consumers.
The Timed transitions use in proposal model
are intended to represent,the most realistic way
possible an entire period by simulation processing
system for FCU feeders balancing. In this particular case, takes a granular period of 60 minutes, i.e.,
seeking feeder reconfiguration lasting one hour depending on sample consumption obtained at 10
minute intervals derived from SUSG information
system (which is not part of this work), that stores
the consumption data of end users.
In this article, will be developed according
to initial proposal of the authors, Sicchar et al.
(2011) but having as a contribution a broad and
integrated PN with hierarchical description of its
sub-process. It will be based on the system developed to FCU energy consumption diagnose, Sicchar et al. (2015) however considering beyond imbalance diagnostic and consumption forecasting
stage,more two stages minimizing current consumption and switching sequence selection.

3182

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

3.1

DPMS Architecture

The process system, is called DPMS because of
its four stages or sub-processesDiagnose, Prevision,Minimization and Selection, each with
a specific algorithm. So, these formed the DPMS
system.
Thus, the DPMS system has an architecture
formed as mentioned above, four specific processing (whose specific algorithms are not covered in
this article)
- Balancing Diagnose or only D stage, that
identifies the imbalance level in each feeder,
Watching two situations balanced feeder,
thus having the algorithm operating finish
and unbalanced feeder that activates the remaining stages of system, in sequence, starting with the consumption forecast step.

In Figure 1 It is shown the DPMS architecture system model, as support process for system
information to supervision center in SUSG environment.It can also be inserted, as an interface in
the existing secondary grid system.
Then, we have the operation flow of the
DPMS system, which is shown in more details in
Figure 2.This flow, is started from consumption
data processing, and after consumption diagnosis
are identified possible losses and load imbalances.
In positive case, starts energy and current consumption prediction process, in each
FCU feeder.
The main objective is to obtain,the future consumption matrix of electrical
current.Furthermore, the prediction results serve
to minimizing consumption process.

- Prevision Consumption or simply P stage,
which only is activate when an imbalance is
identified (in some feeder). So, It forecasts
the current and energy consumption in feeders and returning this processing to the SG
information system, that later develops the
energy future consumption matrix indicating
the trend of consumption to the FCU.
- Minimization Consumption or just M
stage, which procedure some combination of
switching between feeders from the current
and the future consumption of the energy and
electrical current obtained by P stage. So,
in order to minimize power losses effects and
ensuring the equilibrium state in feeders.
- Switchin Sequence or only S stage, Which
chooses the best switching combination from
the M stage. This selection is based on
a correlation ratio analysis between the real
value of consumption and with their values
from the minimization stage.So, the final processing is sent to the information system SG
as switching sequence, to procedure in fact
the AFR.

Figure 2 DPMS flowchart.
Followed by minimize consumption, looking
for same sequences combinations of switching between feeders, which are calculated from current
and future values of electrical current consumption.
Finally, switching matrix selection chooses
which through, send best combination for FCU
feeders balancing implementation. If imbalance
minimizing process ends, otherwise proceeds in
choosing other combinations for switching.
4

Figure 1 DPMS Architecture.

ISSN 2525-8311

DPMS System in Petri Nets

In Figure 3 it is shown the DPMS system modeling in THPN. So, its describes the main PN of
DPMS system. The hierarchical extension used
is place bounded substitution (PBS) according to
definition 2.2.2.
It is shown, the places that give sub-processes
in main PN, that are described later in details.The
DPMS system is connecting with a SUSG environment, which is compound of the Supervision
Center, the Feeders Switching Control and the
Consumption Data Record.So, system is activated
through load balancing check application requirement in FCU feeders, activated by the Supervision
Center of SUSG.

3183

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

a measurement by data measurement (DM),
whose flow is transferred as consumption data
record (CDR).
5

Figure 3 DPMS THPNMain Petri net.
The inner workflow of DPMS system is formed
as follows (see Figure 5)

. DP.Data

Process Hierarchical subnet.Which has all statistical treatmen
sub-processes.It is formed byL1 -DP,that
classifies power, current and energy consumption data.L2 -DP,which calculates
average consumption.L3 -DP, that forms
discrete consumption states.

. BD.Balancing Diagnose Hierarchical sub-

net. It is containsL4 -BD,which inserts load
and energy consumption as input variables
in inference system.L5 -BD,that inserts load
and energy consumption variation as input
variable.L6 -BD, which inserts current consumption as output variable.L7 -BDinserts
inference rules.L8 -BDobtain conditions to
imbalance diagnose. BD exit has two conditions FCU balanced T13 -BDand, No balanced FCU T14 -BD that actives PV place.

Results-Validation analysis

In this section,we will show the validation results
of DPMS system, modeled in THPN,using reachability graph, invariant analysis applied in Main
DPSN THPN and also in Hierarchical DPMS
THPN which shown all processes of system and
also use siphon and traps analysis for validation
workflow. For experimental results, was used as
tool a free version of Pipe 4.3.0.
For simulation, timed transitions were used.
It is distributed fixed time intervals, for each operation of sub-process,it was used T  10 seconds,and for total integration operations add up
to a full period of T  60 seconds.
5.1

Main DPMS THPN validation

a) Reachability Graph.
The Main DPMS
Reachability graph is shown in Figure 4. So,
it represents the PN reachable diagram obtained from Its initial state S0 highlighted
in red, that also represents initial marking of
PN.

. PV.Prevision

Hierarchical
subnet,
with
electrical
current
consumption
sub-processes.It
is
formed
byL9 PV,which
inserts
discrete
states
consumption.L10 -PV,that
calculates
incidences consumption.L11 -PV, which obtain transition matrix.L12 -PV,that obtain
forecast electrical current consumption.

Figure 4 Main DPMS Reachability Graph with
initial marking.

. MN.

Minimization Hierarchical subnet.It is formed byL13 -MN,which inserts measured electric current vector.L14 MN,that inserts forecast current vector.L15 MN, which forms minimization consumption
vector.L16 -MN, that inserts minimization
consumption formula.L17 -MN which obtain
arrangement switching matrices.

. SS.Switching Selection Hierarchical subnet.

It is containsL18 -SS,that inserts switching matrix values and correlation degree between forecast and measurement current, as
like input variables in inference system.L19 SS, which inserts load consumption as output variable.L20 -SS, that inserts inference
rules.L21 -SS, which selects optimal switching matrix. After, this flow goes to supervision center (CS), and then feeder switching control (FC). The process goes through

ISSN 2525-8311

Through Main DPMS simulation, if
verifies that does not exist Deadlock.However,checking a possible conflict
highlighted with a black arrow on S2 BD
place output, between transitions T7 -BD
and T8 -PN, due to balancing result that
evaluates two conditions balanced FCU or
unbalanced FCU. However, this conflict,
will not be controlled due to consider a
random order in system simulation,when it
executes balancing feeders analysis.
b) Invariants Analysis. Still looking for reachability graph, we note that all processes of
system are sequential.However, BD process
is the most critical because to determine the
end of process, if it is found that FCU feeders
are balanced, or the continuation of process
otherwise, activating PV process.

3184

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

This condition form, a specific place invariant PV sub-process can not happen before BD sub-process.But also, we
have the follow condition invariant BD,
PV,MN,SS places cannot happen before
DPsub-process. Thus, we have the follow conditionDP marking,BD marking,PV
marking, MN marking and SS marking,
should be less or equal to 1

M(DP)+M(BD)+M(PV)+M(MN)+
M(SS)+  1

So, we can see, that The net is covered by
positive T-Invariants, therefore it might be
textbfbounded and live.
5.2

Hierarchical DPMS THPN validation

In Figure 5 it is shown the Hierarchical DPMS
THPN simulation.Were performed 1500 firings
with a period of 60 seconds between each, in order to have a complete operating in 1 minute. So,
Were considered 60 FCU in SUSG, to be targets
of balancing feeders analysis process. Thus, in
CDR place there are electrical current and energy consumption of this 60 FCU.

(4)
We also have the follow invariants Supervision Center(SC),Feeder Switching
Control(FC),Consumption Data Record
(CDR) places cannot happen before SSsubprocess. If any as a result of the process, no
balanced FCU
M (SS) + M (SC) + M (F C) + M (CDR)  1
(5)
In a similar situation, but starting from
BD should also be considered the follow
invariants Supervision Center(SC),Feeder
Switching Control(FC),Consumption Data
Record (CDR) places cannot happen before
BDsub-process. If any as a result of the
process, FCU balanced
M (BD) + M (SC) + M (F C) + M (CDR)  1
(6)
By P-Invariants result, we can verified that
invariants indicates aboven, are true

M(BD) + M(Consumption Data Record) +
M(DP) + M(Feeders Switching Control ) +
M(MN) + M(PV) + M(SS) + M(Supervision
Center)  1
(7)
The PN Invariants is shown in 2x9 constant T-Invariants matrix depending on
T5P N ,T6P N ,T7P N ,T8F C ,T9F C ,
T1P N ,T2P N ,T3BD ,T4P N 
tions

TInv  

1
0

1
0

1  0
0  1







1 

0 







transi-

T5P N
T6P N
T7P N
T8F C
T9F C

T4P N


















During DPMS system simulation is verifying
efficiently workflow, and there is not deadlock or
conflicts (marked in green in Figure 6) like main
PN, that needs regulatory control.
However, it is found some traps focus especially on BDout (in red), where are accumulated and consumed several tokens continuously,
but it normalizes and adjusts over time.
It is, also found some siphons focus in No
Balanced FCU, where which are accumulated
several tokens, but this is actually equal to No
balanced FCU (in green) both are only process
counters, to facilitate processing system count.
The DPMS THPN Reachability graph is
shown in Figure 6. It represents the diagram of
reachable states of the PN. Its initial state S0
highlighted in red. If verifies that does not exist Deadlock, and that the PN it might be textbfbounded and live.
Looking for reachability graph, we note
that all some specifics place invariant PV
sub-process can not happen before BD subprocess.But also, we have the follow condition invariant BD, PV,MN,SS, SC,FC, Data
Measuring (DM), and CDR, places cannot happen before DPsub-process. Thus, we have the
follow condition
M(DP)+M(BD)+M(PV)+M(MN)+
M(SS)+M(SC)+M(FC)+M(DM) +M(CDR) 1

(8)

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 5 DPMS THPN Simulation.

(9)

3185

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

References
Alt, M., Goltcher, S., Hoheisel, A. and Pohl, H.W. (2006). Using High Level Petri Nets for
Hierarchical Grid Workflows - 01, Proc.of the
Seconf IEEE International Conference on eScience and Grid Computing (e-Science06).
Huang, Y., Mao, S. and Nelms, R. M. (2015).
Smooth Scheduling for Electricity Distribution in the Smart Grid - 02, IEEE System
Journal.
Figure 6 DPMS THPN Reachability Graph with
initial marking and conflicts.
By P-Invariants result, we can verified that
invariants indicates aboven, are true

M(BD) + M(BD-out) + M(Consumption Data
Record) + M(Data Measuring) + M(DP) +
M(DP-out) + M(Feeders Switching Control )
+ M(L10-PV) + M(L11-PV) + M(L12-PV) +
M(L13-MN) + M(L14-MN) + M(L15-MN) +
M(L16-MN) + M(L17-MN) + M(L18-SS) +
M(L19-SS) + M(L1-DP) + M(L20-SS) + M(L21SS) + M(L2-DP) + M(L3-DP) + M(L4-BD) +
M(L5-BD) + M(L6-BD) + M(L7-BD) + M(L8BD) + M(L9-PV) + M(MN) + M(MN-out) +
M(PV) + M(PV-out) + M(SS) + M(SS-out) +
M(Supervision Center)  1
(10)
6

Conclusion

A model Petri net, of load balancing process,
called DPMS system to final consumption units
in low voltage secondary grid, has been presented from which it is shown workflow formal
validation. Having been used a timed hierarchical Petri net, to represent a dynamic abstraction of the operation flow of main and internal
processes that form the DPMS system.Through
the net synthesis,the reachability graph,invariant
analysis and, workflow simulation, among others the vividness and limited network properties were checked. Verifying in summary efficiently operation of system without deadlocks and
conflicts, that requested implementation of any
regulatory control.Suggested future steps develop
model DPMS system using timed hierarchical colored Petri nets,to further improve computational
efficiency.

Shahgoshtasbi, D. and Jamshidi, M. M. (2014).
A New Intelligent NeuroFuzzy Paradigm for
Energy-Efficient Homes - 03, Systems Journal, IEEE Transactions.
Shahnia, F., Wolfs, P. J. and Ghosh, A. (2014).
Voltage Unbalance Improvement in Low Voltage Residential with rooftop PVs using custom power devices - 04, Electrical Power and
Energy Systems, Elsevier.
Sharma, I., Canizares, C. and Bhattacharya, K.
(2014). Smart Charging of PEVs Penetrating
Into Residential Distribution Systems - 05,
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid.
Sicchar, J. R., da Costa, C. T., Silva, J. R. and
de Freitas, R. C. (2015). Gerenciamento
de Consumo de Energia em Residencias com
Frame GCR - 06, Proc. in XII SBAI 2015.
Sicchar, J. R., Tavares, C., Salmon, A. O., Silva,
J. R., Pina, I. F. and C.Gomes, R. (2011).
Sistema Inteligente para Analise de Consumo
de Energia Eletrica em Smart Grid de Baixa
Tensao - 07, Proc. in X SBAI 2011.
Silva, J. R. and del Foyo, P. G. (2012). Timed
Petri Nets. Chapter 16. Petri Nets Manufacturing and Computing Science - 08, Intech.
Siti, W. M., Jimoh, A. and Nicolae, D. (2011).
Distribution network phase load balancing as
a combinatorial optimization problem using
fuzzy logic and Newton-Raphson - 09, Electric Power Systems, Elsevier.
Wang, L., Chen, Q., Gao, Z., Niu, L., Zhao, Y.,
Ma, Z. and Wu, D. (2015). Knowledge representation and general Petri net models for
power grid fault diagnosis - 10, IET Journals
 Magazines.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank UEPA, UFPA, USP and FAPEAM, for allowing scientific achievement of this
proposal.

ISSN 2525-8311

3186