Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

ROBUST CONTROL APPLIED IN BUCK BOOST CONVERTER IN A PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM
JOÃO T. DE CARVALHO NETO, ANDERSON L. O. CAVALCANTI, ANDRES O. SALAZAR
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Computing Engineering and Automation Department
University Campus, No number, Lagoa Nova, Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil
E-mails dca@dca.ufrn.br

JOÃO TEIXEIRA DE CARVALHO NETO, ANDERSON LUIZ DE OLIVEIRA CAVALCANTI, ANDRES ORTIZ SALAZAR
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Computing Engineering and Automation Department
P.O. Box 1524, 59078-900, Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil
E-mails joaoteixeira@dca.ufrn.br, anderson@dca.ufrn.br, andres@dca.ufrn.br
Abstract The utilization of renewable energies like wind energy and solar energy, have been grown in the last decades. In the
solar energy, photovoltaic modules are connected with a power stage for electric energy production. Normally, when the converter works for some time, yours inductive and capacitive components suffer heating, causing an increase on the converters output
resistance. This problem changes the systems operating point, contributing directly in output power loss. The main objective of
this work is synthetize a robust control that minimizes the effects of the converter inductor parasite resistance and possible modifications of solar radiation. The main objective of the controller is maintaining a constant voltage in the output load. The results
showed that the robust control techniques H2 and H minimized the effects of the uncertainties and the disturbances approximating the system output response to its operating point.
Keywords Robust Control, Photovoltaic System, Buck-Boost, Converter, Uncertainties, Disturbances.
Resumo A utilização de energia_renovável como energia_eólica e energia_solar, tem crescido nas ultimas décadas. Na energia
solar, os módulos fotovoltaicos são conectados com conversores para produção de energia_elétrica. Normalmente, quando o conversor trabalha por algum tempo, seus componentes indutivos e capacitivos sofrem aquecimento, causando um aumento na resistência de saída do conversor. Este problema modifica o ponto de operação do sistema, contribuindo diretamente para perca de potência de saída do sistema. O objetivo principal deste trabalho é de sintetizar um controlador_robusto que minimize os efeitos da
resistência parasita do indutor do conversor e de eventuais modificações na radiação solar. O objetivo principal do controlador é
de manter a tensão na resistência de saída constante. Os resultados mostraram que as técnicas de controle_robusto H2 e H minimizaram os efeitos das incertezas e das perturbações aproximando a resposta do sistema para seu ponto de operação.
Palavras-chave .

1

Introduction

The photovoltaic (PV) energy consists in a clean
energy totally free of pollution. Besides it requires
low maintenance, this energy permits increase the
electric power by the incorporations of additional
modules. However this is an expensive energy yet
and only with the advance of technology, the components for the production of this energy will become
less expensive.
Other disadvantage of this energy is related with its
cost-benefit. To generate a considerable amount of
energy is necessary a lot of photovoltaic panels or
arrays working in parallel or in series, which turns
this energy contested yet. Some works in this subject
aim to increase the conversion of solar energy in
electric energy and the availability of its maximum
power to consumption.
To increase this conversion it is need to reach the
Maximum Power Point Tracking (MPPT) through
tracking algorithms. Almost all papers related to this
kind of subject synthetize the tracking algorithm with
the objective of minimizing the solar radiation variaISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

tion and the photovoltaic module temperature effects.
Thus, some papers related to photovoltaic system
treat the synthesis of the MPPT based in some kind
of controls PI, PD, PID, adaptive_control, adaptive
robust control, Fuzzy based control, and others, but
nowadays no one of these papers treat a way to maintain a constant output voltage in order to supply
power to an output load. The algorithm is based in
robust control and it considers the uncertainties
caused by the heating of the power stage components
due to the prolonged use of it.
The works proposed in Olalla et. al. (2011) and in
Andrea et. al. (2010), treat to synthetize robust controllers to minimize the uncertainties and disturbances effects in the output response in DC-DC converters but no one of these works treat this application in photovoltaic systems.
The main objective of this work consists in modeling
uncertainties and disturbances in a photovoltaic system and the synthesis and selection of a robust controller to minimize the effects of its uncertainties and
disturbances contributing to supplying, constant
output voltage to an output load.

4650

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

2 Photovoltaic System
2.1 System Presentation
According to Martins et. al. (2011), a photovoltaic system can be divided in three parts a photovoltaic module (array or panel) responsible for the conversion of solar energy in electric energy, a tracking
algorithm that receives information of the system and
defines the best operating point and a power stage
(usually a converter) that will make the photovoltaic
module to operate in the operation point calculated
by the tracking algorithm.

Figure 2. Maximum operating points in a photovoltaic system.

The angle formed by the inclination of the resistance
load in Figure 2 defines the power stage effective
inclination for MPPT. The effective inclination for
DC-DC Buck-Boost converter can be given by
 (

Figure 1. Diagram of a photovoltaic system.

2.2 Buck-Boost Converter with a Resistive Load
The selection of the power stage is important
considering the range of operating points (stage)
where it is going to work and the cost of the power
stage. Thus, considering that the power stage in a
photovoltaic system can work in almost all operating
point due to the large solar radiation variation in
some places of the world and considering the low
difference in the power stages prices the DC-DC
Buck-Boost converter is the chopper selected to be
part of the Photovoltaic system of this work. This
conclusion can be obtained in Coelho, Concer and
Martins (2010).
In this work a DC-DC Buck-Boost converter is the
power stage that will supply the electric power to the
resistive load, like is showed in figure 1. The major
problem is how to define the best operating point to
make sure that a constant output voltage is supplied
to the output load, assuming that the photovoltaic
module characteristic curve changes with the module
temperature and the solar radiation.
Figure 2 shows the interception between the resistive
load and the photovoltaic module characteristic
curves varying the solar radiation in PV module. In
this way, the best operating point to reach MPPT is
the point that the electric power available in the photovoltaic module is maximum. In this work, it is
necessary to reach a point in order to offer constant
voltage to the output load.
Thus, the interception between the PV module curve
and the resistive load curve shows the maximum
operating point for the system.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

) 

(1)

The objective of the robust control in this work is to
change the converter duty cycle in order to make the
converter to operate supplying constant output voltage to the output load.
In equation 1, D is the duty-cycle of the converter
and it can be varied between 0 and 1. Thus, replacing
D in equation 1, the range of angle can be determined
by
. This range of angle is the range of
operating points where the Buck-Boost converter can
work. It was one of the characteristics that was considered
in the choice of the power stage.

2.3 DC-DC Buck-Boost Converter Analysis
According to Erickson and Maksimovic (2004),
considering inductive losses, the DC-DC Buck-Boost
converter circuit is shown as follow

Figure 3. Electric circuit of the DC-DC Buck-Boost converter with
inductive loss.

Figure 4 shows the current way through the converter
when the switch S is on.

Figure 4. Current Conduction in DC-DC Buck-Boost converter
when the switch S is on.

4651

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

When the switch S is on we have the following system





(6)



(2)
Let be 



Figure 5 shows the current way through the converter
when the switch S is off.

and 







(7)



(

)

(
Figure 5. Current Conduction in DC-DC Buck-Boost converter
when the switch S is off.

)





(9)

When the switch S is off we have the following system

(3)

Then, the DC-DC Buck-Boost converter linearized
system in space state is shown as follows







Considering that when the switch is on the converter
works with duty-cycle   and when the switch is off
the converter works with duty-cycle 
, then the
system equations for DC-DC Buck-Boost can be
given by


(8)

(10)

and






(

)

(4)








Let be
,
and
and
yours nominal values in steady state represented by
respectively ,
and . Let be
and
.


(5)




The system above contains non-linearity in
and
in equation  and non-linearity in
and
in equation  . According to Oliveira Jr. and
Tomacelli (2007), is showed that a non-linearized
system can be linearized through Taylor series expansion. This linearization is performed around the
equilibrium point, so the Taylor series expansion can
be given by



 




In system 10, represents the duty-cycle,
represents the source voltage,
is the inductor current,
is the output voltage, is the inductance in inductor,
is the capacitance in the capacitor,
is the
output load resistance and , ,
and , are respectively source voltage, inductance, output voltage
and duty-cycle in steady state. We can determine
and
by determining the equilibrium point, in the
system steady state, in other words





(11)

So, it can be affirmed that

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

4652

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

(12)





(13)

3 Synthesis Robust Control
3.1 Robust Control and Uncertainties and Disturbances
According to Erickson and Maksimovic (2004),
some non-linearity is presented in converters. When
converters work for a certain time their components
heat up. Normally the output capacitor and the inductor suffer this heating increase more intensively. This
problem causes the appearing of a parasite resistance
in the converter and consequently a decrease of power loss delivered to the output load resistance. In this
work, just the parasite inductor resistance will be
considered. When working for a certain time this
resistance increases and steals power, harming the
system output power. This problem is considered an
uncertain, and it is characterized by a variation in this
resistance.
According to Martins et. al. (2011), the module temperature and the solar radiation can be considered
disturbances in the system, because their variations
change the voltage and current delivered to the power stage causing variations in electric power supplied
to the output resistor.
The synthesis of a robust controller is the main objective of this work because it is intended to minimize the effects of these uncertainties and disturbances, making the power stage supplying constant
output voltage to the output load.
The whole modeling to obtain the controller utilizes
modeling in state space. In this way, figure 6 shows
the blocks diagram for the photovoltaic system with
state feedback, where the matrix of gain is the state
feedback matrix. The equations system of the block
diagram above is given by system 10.

Where
is the control signal of the system (dutycycle of the converter) and
the disturbance
input (module voltage).
According to Boyd et. al. (1994), the matrixes class
with uncertainties in the polytopic form can be
described as the following set








(14)

Where the set
is convex, closed and all the matrixes
are known and
is the vertex
. Thus, the number of vertices of the polytope can be given by
(15)
Considering the uncertain in , the class
trixes
set is showed below




of ma-

(16)

Where








According to equations 12 and 13,
and
depends on , so there are two more uncertainties one
uncertainty in
and one uncertainty in . Thus,
exist one class of matrixes
given by




(17)

Where




(


)

(


)

(


)






Figure 6. Blocks diagram for the photovoltaic system in statespace.

The system equation of the block diagram above is
given by system 10.
ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5





4653

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

The two types of controller that will be utilized in
simulations are
controller and
controller.
3.2 Formulation of H2 Control Problem
The
controller can be found minimizing the
norm
and solving the following optimization
problem written by linear matrix inequalities (LMIs),
respectively given by






(18)





(


(19)

)


The DC-DC Buck-Boost converter was projected
considering specifications in table 1. In this project
was considered one more capacitor to minimize noises. The simulations values are shown as follows.
Table 1. Values of the Buck-Boost converter components and
voltages used in simulations.
Component

Capacitor
Inductor
Inductor resistance
Output resistance
Module voltage
Output power
Output Voltage

Symbol

C
L
R

Value

200 mF
745
20 m and 400 m
11.52 
26.3 V
200 W
-48V



Where the matrix is symmetric and positive definite and
, and the state feedback matrix K
of gains can be given by

The simulations were done in PSIM simulator and
MATLAB. The simulations in PSIM were done only
to demonstrate that the variation in solar radiation
and the parasite resistor change the system operation
point. The circuit is shown in figure 7

(20)
3.3 Formulation of H Control Problem
The
controller can be found minimizing the
norm
and solving the following LMIs respectively given by






(21)

(22)



Figure 7. Photovoltaic array connected with DC-DC Buck-Boost
converter.



and
(

)

Where
, and the state feedback matrix
gains can be given by

of

(23)
According to Boyd et. al. (1994), the uncertainties
and the disturbances effects change the system operating point. These two controllers should bring the
system output response to the operating point.
4 Simulation Results
This session contains simulations of the
photovoltaic system with the usage of the feedback
control with the matrix gain K of the controllers
discussed in this text.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Figure 8. DC-DC Buck-Boost converter.

In all simulations the perturbations are simulated
through variations in solar radiation. Notice that in
the inductor resistance
changes its value
(from 20 m to 400 m) simulating its heat up and
the solar radiation drops from
to
in
. Figure 9 shows the power
delivered to the power stage and the output power.

4654

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

In the flow diagram is the duty cycle in the operation point (
). The others variables and
constants were discussed previously in section.
The next simulations were done in MATLAB. Table
2 shows the variation in converter input voltage
(simulating variation in radiation) and the variation
in the inductor resistance (simulating inductor heating) in each time in the simulation.
Figure 9. Graphic of maximum power delivered to the power stage
and the output power in watts.
Table 2. Converter input voltage and inductor resistance values in
simulation.

Figure 9 shows that in
the change of the
inductor resistance cause a decrease in the output
power. At
, the power naturally drops due
the decrease of the solar radiation. Thus, it is perceived that the uncertain in
and the disturbance
caused by the change in solar radiation causes power
loss. In this way, to avoid this decrease and maintain
the output power constant, the converters duty cycle
needs to be adjusted. The usage of the two controllers described in this text should minimize the uncertainties and the disturbances effects, making the
output voltage closer to its reference.
The synthesis of the ideal control for each kind of
controller (
controller and
controller) can be
obtained through the linearized form shown in this
text. The controllers obtained in those cases were
used at the non-linearized system, shown in system
5. Considering the variation in the inductor resistance
in 1900 (from 20 m to 400 m), and variation in
and
in
, we have
,
and the feedback matrix
for
and
controls techniques are respectively




(24)





(25)

Converter Input
Voltage (V)

Inductor Resistance (
)

26.3
21.3
26.3
26.3
21.3
26.3

20
20
20
400
400
400

Time (s)

The inductor current and the output voltage waveforms are shown as follow, for each kind of controller and without control feedback. The initial conditions considered in these simulations are zero.

The algorithm that applies the usage of the state
feedback control in the PV system proposed is
showed in figure 10
Figure 11. System output voltage waveform without control
feedback.

Figure 10 - Robust control state feedback algorithm flow diagram.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Figure 12. System output voltage waveform with H-2 control
feedback.

4655

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Figure 13. System output voltage waveform with H-infinite control feedback.

Figure 16. Inductor current waveform with H-infinite control
feedback.

It can be observed that the increase of the inductor
resistance in
cause more output power loss
that a decrease of volts in the converter input. In
both cases the controllers minimized the power
losses. Therefore, the
controller proved to be a
little more efficient than
controller.

The graphics of the simulations show that the
controllers approached the system output response to
the operating point so as minimized clearly the
variation current in the inductor. Thus, it can be
confirmed that the control techniques used in these
simulations considering a set of uncertainties and
disturbances, make the system output response stay
close of the operating point. Consequently it can be
affirmed that both controllers minimized the inductor
resistance increase effects, so as the solar radiation
intensity decrease effects on the system.
Note that in these simulations, the converter is
supplied by an ideal voltage source and the variations
in the radiation are simulated by the variation in the
converter input voltage. In other words the state
feedback controller works only if the photovoltaic
module is considered a source voltage  the power in
the PV module is supplied to the converter by IGBT
or MOSFET switching that is controlled by the state
feedback robust control, in order to maintain the
converter output voltage constant.
To simulate the state feedback controller with the PV
system is necessary that the maximum power
delivered from the PV array be bigger than the
maximum converter output power, and the PV
voltage in standard test conditions (
and
) needs to be the same voltage that the converter
was projected.

Figure 14. Inductor current waveform without control feedback.

5 Applications

Figure 15. Inductor current waveform with H-2 control feedback.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

The main objective of the controller proposed in
this paper is to maintain constant the output voltage
to supply energy to a resistance load. As mentioned
above, the PV array needs to have maximum power
bigger than the maximum power that the converter
was projected. It can be assumed, so, that some
energy will not be utilized, so it can be proposed in
other works the implementation of an energy storage
that can supply energy to the system when there is no
sun light. Figure 17 shows this configuration.

4656

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Figure 17  Configuration of the photovoltaic system with energy
storage.

Another configuration proposed to avoid the waste of
energy of the PV Array is to include some converters
to work in parallel and share the energy from the
same PV array. Remember that the amount of power
that the converters consume must be smaller than the
maximum power supplied by the PV array. For example, if the PV system have one PV array with
maximum power of
watts, me can use until
converters such as the one from the table 1.

Figure 18  Configuration of photovoltaic system with some
converters in parallel

6 Conclusion
Nowadays the solar energy is an expensive energy due to the cost of the photovoltaic arrays and the
other components. There are some techniques that
maximize the catchment and use of the solar energy.
Therefore, the uncertainties and disturbances in the
whole system must be considered in these techniques
because they can decrease the efficiency of the energy conversion and the supply of the electric energy
as was shown in this text. To ensure that the output
voltage is constant independently of uncertainties
and disturbances it is necessary to use one technique
that can maintain constant this output voltage.
According to whole analysis of the system, it can be
observed that the parasite resistance increases due the
heat up of it and the solar radiation intensity decrease

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

given by cloudy climates and the eventide certainly
can cause power loss in photovoltaic systems and the
output power will not be constant anymore. Thus this
system must need some kind of robust control that
minimizes the effects of these disturbances and uncertainties.
The matrix feedback controllers
and
were
success synthetized minimizing
and
norms
and they were tested in the photovoltaic system nonlinearized form. The results showed that the both
controllers minimized the parasite resistance increase
effects and the solar radiation decrease effects and
brought the system output response close to the operating point. Consequently, the controllers decreased
the power loss of the system.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thanks to CAPES by the
financial support.
References
Boyd S., Ghaoui L. E. L., Feron E. and Balakrishnan
V. (1994). Linear Matrix Inequalities in System
and Control Theory. SIAM Studies in Applied
Mathematics.
Bhattacharyya, S. P., Chapellat H. and Keel L. H.
(1995). Robust Control  The Parametric
Approach.
Erickson R. W. and Maksimovic D. (2004).
Fundamentals of Power Electronics  Second
Edition.
Rashid, M. H. (2001). Power Electronics Handbook
 Third Edition.
Martins, D. C., Coelho R. F. and Santos W. M.,
September 2011, Maximum Power Tracking
Techniques for Photovoltaic Systems Review
and New Proposals, book of course, XI Brazilian
Congress of Power Electronics.
Oliveira Jr. D. S., Tomaselli L. C. (2007). Estudo de
um Conversor CC-CC Buck-Boost. Research
Article.
Coelho R. F., Concer F. M. and Martins D. C.
(2010). Estudo Comparativo Entre Conversores
Estáticos Operando como Rastreadores de
Máxima Potência em Sistemas Fotovoltaicos.
Research Article presented in XVIII Congresso
Brasileiro de Automatica  September 12 to 16,
2010  BonitoMS.
Olalla C., Queinnex I., Levya R. and El Aroudi A.
(2011). Robust Optimal Control of Billinear DCDC Converters. Control Engeneering Practice 19
(688-699).
Andrea C. Q., Gules R., Romaneli E. F. R., Pinto J.
O. P. and Gonçalves R. C. (2010). Sistema de
Rejeição de Distúrbio e Rastreamento
e
Aplicado ao Conversor Boost Usando LMIs.
Research Article presented in XVIII Congresso
Brasileiro de Automatica  September 12 to 16,
2010  BonitoMS.
4657