XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

CHANGES IN MUSCLE ACTIVATION AND FORCE FLUCTUATIONS DURING LOWER LIMB
MUSCLE CONTRACTION EFFECT OF GENDER
SRUTHI SAHEBJADA, DINESH K. KUMAR, SRIDHAR P. ARJUNAN, PETER DABNICHKI
Biosignal lab, School of Engineering, RMIT University
GPO Box 2476, Melbourne 3001, Australia
E-mails sruthi.sahebjada@rmit.edu.au, dinesh.kumar@rmit.edu.au,
sridhar.arjunan@rmit.edu.au, peter.dabnichki@rmit.edu.au
CRISTIANE C. PAIM
Depto. de Engenharia Elétrica, Universidade Federal da Bahia
Rua Aristides Novis, 02, 40210-630, Salvador, BA, Brasil
E-mail cpaim@ufba.br
Abstract The purpose of this study was to examine force fluctuations and strength of the muscle contraction in lower limbs
for young men and women across various force levels. Surface Electromyogram (sEMG) signals were recorded when subjects
performed isometric contraction at various levels of force (25, 50, 75 and 100 Maximal Voluntary Contraction).
Steadiness in maintaining the level of contraction was determined as the coefficient of variation in the recorded force output.
Strength of the contraction was computed as the Root Mean Square. Logarithmic plots of these features were used to identify the
significance of gender in force fluctuations and strength of muscle contraction. Statistically higher coefficients of variation were
observed at 25 of the Maximal Voluntary Contraction and decreased linearly with the increase in Maximal Voluntary
Contraction. The results also suggested that there is a significant difference in the coefficient of variation between genders.
Keywords muscle strength, force, gender, sEMG, lower limb
Resumo O propósito desse estudo foi examinar as flutuações de força e também a força de contração_muscular nos membros
inferiores de jovens homens e mulheres em vários níveis de forca. Sinais eletromiográficos de superfície foram registrados
quando os indivíduos realizaram contrações isométricas em vários níveis de força (25, 50, 75 e 100 da máxima
contração voluntária). A estabilidade na manutenção do nível de contração foi determinada como o coeficiente de variação da
saída de força armazenada. A força de contração foi calculada pela raiz quadrada do valor médio. Parcelas logarítmicas dessas
características foram utilizadas para identificar a importância do gênero em flutuações de força e na força de contração
muscular. Estatisticamente maiores coeficientes de variação foram observados em 25 da máxima contração voluntária
decrescendo linearmente com o aumento da máxima contração voluntária. Os resultados também sugerem que existe uma
diferença significativa no coeficiente de variação entre os gêneros.
Palavras-chave 

1

Introduction

Force steadiness, which refers to the ability to
perform muscle contractions with minimum
fluctuations in force while matching a given force
level (Rose et al, 2013) is another metric that could
provide information of motor control. Force
steadiness is typically quantified in absolute terms as
the standard deviation or relative as the coefficient of
force variation. Less variability implies better force
control. The triceps surae muscle group is interesting
in this respect since it is comprised of three
muscles with different fibre compositions having a
shared function of plantar flexion and dorsiflexion
movements. It is also believed that the triceps surae
muscle group contributes in generating forward
propulsive force during gait (Neptune et al, 2001).
It is a known fact that men have greater muscle
strength than women and can therefore generate
greater forces (Svendsen and Madeleine, 2010).
Consequently, the relative amount of force men must
control is smaller than women for the same target
force level. It was reported that fluctuations and

ISSN 2525-8311

control strategies differ between moderate and low
force levels (Taylor et al, 2013 Heyward et al, 1986)
in upper limbs and that men generally have larger and
stronger muscles than women in which contribute to
the lower limb force steadiness as well (Miller et al,
1993). In another report, male subjects showed larger
fluctuations than female subjects, but the target forces
were different between males and females because
these forces were defined relative to maximal forces
(Endo and Kawahara, 2011).
The purpose of this study was to investigate the
variation in force steadiness in the calf muscles in
healthy young men and women during isometric
dorsiflexion and plantar flexion test protocol. The
dorsiflexor muscles are functionally important for
locomotion, posture, balance (Wolfson et al, 1995),
and the prevention of falls in older adults (Cavanagh
et al, 1996).
Furthermore, habitual use of the dorsiflexor muscles
may make men and women less susceptible to disuse
deconditioning than use of muscles more typically
involved in high-power activities (e.g., quadriceps
femoris), which are not often used by older adults.
Moreover, reduced force steadiness has been
associated with higher demand for appropriate neural

1133

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

activity in cortical centers (Yoon et al, 2014).
Research on force steadiness and Surface
Electromyography activity will help in understanding
the key cortical areas associated with control of the
lower leg in healthy subjects thereby establishing a
foundation for identifying the plasticity of these areas
with impaired motor function that can occur with
aging or neurological conditions.

(a)

(b)

2 Material and Methods
2.1 Subjects
Twenty healthy subjects without orthopedic or
neurological injuries (12 males and 8 females with
ages ranging from 23-34 years) participated in this
study. The average height of the participants was
167.5 10.3 cm and Body Mass Index (BMI) was 23
4 kg.m-2. All subjects signed a written document of
informed consent before testing that was approved by
the RMIT Human Research Ethics Committee. Prior
to affixing the electrodes, the skin above the lower
limb muscles was prepared by abrading and cleaning
with alcohol swabs.

(c)
Figure 1 (a) Experimental setup used to acquire sEMG data from
triceps surae muscles. (b), (c) Electrode placement as per
SENIAM recommendations on Tibialis Anterior, Lateral
Gastrocnemius, Medial Gastrocnemius and Soleus muscles.

3 Data Analysis
2.2 Experimental Protocol
Sensors were placed on the surface of triceps surae
muscles  Tibialis Anterior (TA), Lateral
Gastrocnemius (LG), Medial Gastrocnemius (MG)
and Soleus (Sol). Electrode positioning followed the
SENIAM recommendations and a reference electrode
was placed on the lateral malleolus. EMG signals
were recorded when the subjects performed isometric
plantar flexion and dorsiflexion movements as shown
in fig. 1.
sEMG was recorded using DELSYS (Boston, MA,
USA) sEMG acquisition system. The system gain is
1000 with bandwidth 20450 Hz. The sampling rate
of the system was 1000 samples second for each
channel. At the start of the experiment, the maximum
voluntary contraction (MVC) was determined for
each subject.
Subjects performed the isometric contraction at their
25, 50, 75 and 100 MVC. In order to
maintain the force level, the feedback of the force
sensors was displayed on the computer screen to the
volunteers. Subjects were asked to maintain the
contraction level for 10 seconds. This was repeated
three times for each of the various contraction levels.
For analysis, five seconds of data was used where the
subject maintained the level of force with respect to
the feedback provided.

ISSN 2525-8311

In order to measure the changes in the force and
strength of activation, the following time-domain
features were computed
a) Coefficient of variation (CoV) Force
fluctuations were quantified by determining
the coefficient of variation, CoV was
calculated by expressing the standard
deviation of the exerted force as a percentage
of the mean of the exerted force. CoV is a
measure of the regularity with which the
motor unit is discharging. The smaller the
coefficient of variation, the sharper and
higher will be the peak corresponding to the
firing rate in the magnitude of the Fourier
transform.
CoV() 

standard deviation
100
mean

b) RMS Root mean square of EMG signal

RMS 

1
n

N

 x 
k 1

2

k

k  1,2,, N

where N is the number of samples in the signal xk.

1134

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

4

Results

4.1 Force fluctuations
The force steadiness was quantified by calculating
the standard deviation (SD) and coefficient of
variation (CoV) values of the force signals for both
genders. These values were was log transformed to
normalize and better observe the variations. Standard
deviation values decreased linearly with increasing
MVC levels for both plantar flexion and dorsiflexion
movements across both the genders. (fig. 2, 3). In
both the movements, it was observed that the females
had a higher SD values.

Figure 5 Natural logarithm of Coefficient of Variation of force
during plantarflexion at isometric force control testing at different
MVC levels in males (green) and females (red).

4.2

EMG Activity Results

In both gestures, the values of RMS exponentially
increased with the intensity of contraction. It was
observed that the females had a higher RMS of TA
and Sol during dorsiflexion and lesser RMS of MG
and LG as compared to the corresponding values in
males. (fig. 6, 7). In both contractions, across all the
subjects, the slopes of the agonist for EMG activity
were signicantly (p<0.05) higher than those of the
antagonist. Consequently, during dorsiflexion, TA
was observed to higher RMS-EMG values than its
antagonist counterparts and MG showed higher
muscle activity during plantarflexion.

Figure 2 Natural logarithm of Standard Deviation of force
during dorsiflexion at isometric force control testing at 25, 50, 75
and 100 MVC levels in males (green) and females (red).

Figure 3 Natural logarithm of Standard Deviation of force
during plantarflexion at isometric force control testing at 25, 50,
75 and 100 MVC levels in males (green) and females (red).

CoV values increased with increasing force levels
during dorsiflexion (fig. 4, and Fig.5). However, in
women, the values decreased significantly in
dorsiflexion. Males are observed to have lower CoV
values in both the gestures meaning their force
steadiness was relatively better.

Figure 4 Natural logarithm of Coefficient of Variation of
force during dorsiflexion at isometric force control testing at
different MVC levels in males (green) and females (red).

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 6 RMS of EMG of TA during dorsiflexion at isometric
force control testing at different MVC levels in males (thick lines)
and females (dotted lines).

During plantar flexion, males were observed to have
much higher muscle activity than females. (fig 8,9).
In both the genders, the RMS-EMG of MG was
higher in comparison to the other muscles.

Figure 7 RMS of EMG of MG (blue) , LG (green) and SOL (red)
during dorsiflexion at isometric force control testing at different
MVC levels in males (thick lines) and females (dotted lines).

1135

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

women have been reported to have smaller twitch
force of a whole muscle (Miller et al, 1993), higher
proportion
of
type
I
fibers
(Simoneau
and Bouchard, 1989), and longer half-relaxation time
(Hicks and McCartney, 1996) in some muscles.
These features are similar to those seen in muscles of
elderly persons.
5.2 EMG Activity
Figure 8 RMS of EMG of MG during plantar flexion at
isometric force control testing at different MVC levels in males
(thick lines) and females (dotted lines).

Figure 9 RMS of EMG of TA(blue), LG (green) and SOL (red)
during during plantarflexion at isometric force control testing at
different MVC levels in males (thick lines) and females (dotted
lines).

5

Discussion

5.1 Force Steadiness
Results show that there is a higher steadiness in
force output (lower force fluctuations) for males than
females. Since strength and steadiness are related,
such higher strength may allow for greater motor
control. There are at least four features of the motor
output from the spinal cord that could contribute to
the observed differences in steadiness among male
and female subjects. These include
 the average force produced by motor units
(Brown et al, 2010 Christakos, 1982)
 the pattern of co-activation by the agonist and
antagonist muscles (Wessberg and Kakuda,
1999)
 the amount of motor unit synchronization
(Dietz, 1976) and
 the discharge behavior of motor units (Peyton
and Bartlett, 2007).
The results of the present study suggest a probable
role for the variability of motor unit discharge in the
steadiness of muscle contractions in addition to these
factors.
The impact of larger muscle mass, greater strength,
and higher target tensions during exercise in men
compared with women has been addressed in several
studies. Other than showing lower muscle strength,

ISSN 2525-8311

EMG amplitude reects the number of recruited
motor units (MU) and their ring rate in active
muscle (Basmajian et al, 1985). It is also known that
increase in EMG amplitude during isometric muscle
contractions is due to increases in MU recruitment
and the ring rate (DeLuca, 1984). In the antagonist
and agonist, it is has been suggested that each motor
neuron pool of the antagonistic muscle pair is
controlled by a single input (i.e., excitatory and
inhibitory) of the central nervous system during
muscle contraction (Bernardi et al, 1997 Psek and
Cafarelli, 1993). Bernardi et al. (1997) have
suggested that because a similar motor unit
recruitment strategy is applied to the agonistic muscle
pair, the agonist and antagonist have similar
characteristics. Moreover, because the intensity of the
antagonist input is smaller, its motor-unit recruitment
and ring rate are lower than those of the agonist.
In the present study, during isometric muscle
contractions in plantar exion and dorsiflexion, there
was an increase of EMG-RMS values of the agonist
and the antagonist muscles. This increase was more
noticeable for the agonist than for the antagonist
muscles. In addition, the antagonist had smaller
amplitude than the agonist (Figs. 4 -7). The results of
this study are consistent with physiological changes
reported in the research studies (Psek and Cafarelli,
1993 Kim et al, 2008).
6 Conclusion
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
effect of gender on lower limb muscle force
steadiness and muscle activation strategies across a
range of submaximal forces. The triceps surae muscle
group is important for healthy human locomotion, as
it helps to maintain upright posture and generates the
force required to extend the toes when performing
tasks such as pushing a pedal, walking, climbing, and
recreational activities that involve running or
jumping. It is well established that Triceps surae
strength and function are profoundly impacted by
foot and ankle pathology (Aronow et al, (2006).
Weakness in Triceps surae muscle and atrophy has
also been associated with the risk for falls (Wolfson
et al, 1995). Further assessing force steadiness of the
triceps surae may provide important insight into
neuromuscular plasticity after injury, with
interventions such as surgery or rehabilitation, or
with changes in physiological state that occur with

1136

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

aging, fatigue or reduced physical activity (Cavanagh
et al, 1996).
Acknowledgment
We would like to acknowledge the support by School
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, RMIT
University, Melbourne, Australia and CNPq, Brazil
(post-doctoral scholarship).
References
Aronow, M. S. et al. (2006). The effect of triceps
surae contracture force on plantar foot pressure
distribution. Foot Ankle Int 27(1) 43-52.
Basmajian, J.V. and Deluca, C.J. (1985) Muscles
Alive
Their
Functions
Revealed
by
Electromyography. Williams  Wilkins Ed., 5th
Edition, Baltimore.
Bernardi, M Solomonow, M. and Baratta, R.V.
(1997). Motor unit recruitment strategy of
antagonist muscle pair during linearly increasing
contraction. EMG Clin Neurophysiol 37 312.
Brown, R. Edwards, D. and Jakobi, J. (2010) Sex
differences in force steadiness in three positions
of the forearm. European Journal of Applied
Physiology, 110 12511257.
Cavanagh, P.R. Mulfinger, L.M.
and
Owens, D.A. (1996). How do the elderly
negotiate stairs?. Muscle Nerve Suppl. 5S52
S55.
Christakos, C.N. (1982). A study of the muscle force
waveform using a population stochastic model of
skeletal muscle. Biol. Cybern., 4491-106.
DeLuca, C.J. Myoelectrical manifestations of
localized muscular fatigue in humans.Crit. Rev.
Biomed. Eng. 11(4), 251279 (1984).
Dietz, V. Bischofberger, E. Wita, C. and Freund,
H.J. (1976). Correlation between the discharges
of two simultaneously recorded motor units and
physiological tremor. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol., 64097105.
Elble, R.J. and Randall, J.E. (1976) Motor-unit
activity responsible for 8- to 12-Hz component
of human physiological tremor. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 39370383.
Endo, H. and Kawahara, K. (2011). Gender
differences in hand stability of normal young
people assessed at low force levels. Ergonomics,
54273281.
Heyward,V.H. Johannes-Ellis, S.M. and Romer, J. (1
986). Gender differences in strength. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, Vol. 57,
154-159.
Hicks, A.L. and
McCartney, N. (1996). Gender
differences in isometric contractile properties
and fatigability in elderly human muscle. Can J
Appl Physiol 21441454.
Kim, T.K. Shimomura, Y.  Iwanaga, K. and
Katsuura, T. (2008). Comparison of an
ISSN 2525-8311

accelerometer and a condenser microphone for
mechanomyographic signals during measurement
of agonist and Antagonist muscles in sustained
isometric muscle contractions. J Physiol
Anthropol, 27, pp. 121131.
Miller, A.E. MacDougall, J.D. Tarnopolsky, M.A.
and Sale, D.G. (1993). Gender differences in
strength and muscle fiber characteristics. Eur J
Appl Physiol 66254262.
Neptune, RR Kautz, S.A. and Zajac, F.E (2001).
Contributions of the individual ankle plantar
flexors to support, forward progression and
swing initiation during walking. J Biomech
3413871398.
Peyton, C Bartlett R (2007). Biomechanical
Evaluation of Movement in Sport and Exercise
The British Association of Sport and Exercise
Sciences Guide.
Psek, J.A. and Cafarelli, E. (1993). Behavior of
coactive muscles during fatigue. J Appl Physiol
74170175.
Rose, M.H. Lokkegaard, A. Sonne-Holm, S. and
Jensen, B.R (2013). Isometric tremor
irregularity, torque steadiness and rate of force
development in Parkinsons Disease, Motor
Control, Vol. 17, pp. 203216
Simoneau, J.A.
and Bouchard, C. (1989). Human
variation in skeletal muscle fiber-type proportion
and enzyme activities. Am J Physiol Endocrinol
Metab 257E567E572.
Svendsen, J.H. and Madeleine, P. (2010). Amount
and structure of force variability during short,
ramp and sustained contractions in males and
females. Human Movement Science, 29 (1),
35-47.
Taylor, A. M. Christou, E. A. and Enoka, R. M.
(2003). Multiple feature of motor-unit activity
influence force fluctuations during isometric
contractions. Journal of Neurophysiology,
90(2)13501361.
Wessberg, J. and Kakuda, N. (1999). Single motor
unit activity in relation to pulsatile motor output
in human finger movements. J. Physiol (Lond),
517273285.
Wolfson, L. Judge, J. Whipple, R.
King, M. (1995). Strength is a major factor in
balance, gait, and the occurrence of falls.
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 506467.
Yoon, T. Vanden Noven, M. L. Nielson, K. A. and
Hunter, S. K. (2014). Brain areas associated with
force steadiness and intensity during isometric
ankle dorsiflexion in men and women. Exp Brain
Res., 232(10)3133-45.

1137