Qualitative Autonomous Navigation System Employing Event DrivenFuzzy Cognitive Maps and Fuzzy Logic
MÁRCIO MENDONÇA1, LÚCIA VALÉRIA RAMOS DE ARRUDA1, FLÁVIO NEVES JÚNIOR1

Laboratório de Automação e Sistemas Avançados LASCA, UTFPR  Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná
Curitiba  Pr, Brasil, mendonca,lvrarruda,neves@utfpr.edu.br

Abstract
 This work develops a knowledge based system to autonomous navigation using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCM). A new
variant of FCM, named Event Driven-Fuzzy Cognitive Maps, (ED-FCM) is used to model decision tasks andor make inference in
the robot or mobile navigation. Fuzzy Cognitive Maps is a tool that modeling qualitative knowledge in minds maps structured way
through concepts and causal relationships. The proposed model allows representing the dynamic behavior of the mobile in presence
of environment changes. A brief review of correlated works in the navigation area by use of FCM is presented. Some simulation
results are discussed highlighting the ability of the mobile to navigate among obstacle (navigation environment). A comparative
with Fuzzy Logic and future works are also addressed.
Keywords Mobile Robot Navigation, Fuzzy Cognitive Maps, Inference Systems, Intelligent decision systems.

Resumo
 Este trabalho apresenta um desenvolvimento de um sistema autônomo inteligente de navegação baseado em Mapas
Cognitivos Difusos (FCM). Uma nova arquitetura FCM, denominada Event Driven-Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (ED-FCM), é usada para
modelar tarefas de decisões eou fazer inferências em um robô ou veiculo de navegação. FCM é uma ferramenta empregada para
modelar conhecimento qualitativo em uma estrutura baseada em mapas mentais através de conceitos e relações causais. O modelo
proposto permite representar comportamento dinâmico através de mudanças no cenário. Uma breve revisão de trabalhos correlatos
da área de navegação empregando FCM é apresentada. Simulações mostram desempenho e resultados para se avaliar a navegação
entre obstáculos. Uma comparação com controladores_fuzzy é também realizada.
Palavras-chave
 Navegação autônoma, Mapas Cognitivos Difusos, Máquinas de Inferência, Sistemas Inteligentes em toma-

das de decisão.

1

relationships are dynamically adapted by rules that
are triggered by the occurrence of special events.
These events must change mobile behavior. There are
various works in the literature that model heuristic
knowledge necessary for decision-making in autonomous navigation, by means of Fuzzy systems Siraj,
Bridges and Vaughn (2001), Malhotra and Sarkar
(2006), Astudillo and co workers (2006), Min and co
workers (2006), Pipe (2000) and Yeap, Wong and
Schmidt (2000). In a similar way, the approach proposed in this paper build qualitative models to mobile
navigation by means of fuzzy systems. However the
knowledge is structured and built as a cognitive map
that represents the behavior of the mobile.
Originally are modeled the actions of a change of
direction and speed to obstacles deviation. These
obstacles can be static or dynamic characterizing
sudden changes in the environment. Thus, the proposed autonomous navigation system must be able to
take dynamic decisions to move through the environment and sometimes it must change the trajectory
as a result of an event. For this the proposed FCM
model must aggregate discrete and continuous knowledge about navigation. Actions such as the decision
to turn left or right when sensors accuse obstacles and
accelerate when there is a free path are always valid
control actions in all circumstances. In this way, this
type of action is modeled as causal relationship in a

Introduction

Currently there is a growing interest in the development of autonomous robots and vehicles,
mainly because of the great diversity of tasks that can
be carried out by them, especially those that endanger
human health andor the environment Asami (1994)Schraff (1994). As an example, we can cite a Mandow and co worker (1996), which describes an autonomous mobile robot for use in agriculture, in order
to replace the human worker, through inhospitable
activities as spraying with insecticides. The problem
of mobile robots control comprises two main sub
problems 1) navigation, determining of robotvehicle
position and orientation at a given time, and 2)
guided tours, which refers to the control path to be
followed by the robotvehicle. This work specifically
proposes the development of an autonomous navigation system that uses heuristic knowledge about the
behavior of the robotvehicle in various situations,
modeled by fuzzy cognitive maps Kosko (1986).
Through cognitive maps, beliefs or statements
regarding a limited knowledge domain are expressed
through language words or phrases, interconnected
by simple relationship of cause and effect (questionnon-question). In our proposed model, the FCM

2061

classical FCM. However, there are specific situations,
such as the need to maintain a trend of motion mainly
in curves when the vehicle is turning left and sensors
to accuse a new obstacle in the same direction. Due
to inertia and physical restrictions, the mobile cannot
abruptly change direction this type of maneuver must
be carefully executed. In this context, some specific
situations should also be modeled on the map by
causal relationships and concepts, but they are valid
just as a result of a decision-making task caused by
ongoing events. To implement such a strategy, new
type of relationships and concepts will be added to
the FCM classic model. This new type of FCM in
which the concepts and relationships are valid as a
result of decision driven by events is called Event
Driven-FCM, and it is used in this paper to formalize
a computational intelligent hybrid system oriented by
dynamic events.
The remainder of the paper is organized as following. Session 2 introduces Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
concepts and provides a brief review of its application in autonomous navigation. Session 3 describes
the proposed ED-FCM and develops the autonomous
navigation system. Session 4 presents same simulation results obtained with the proposed navigation
system and fuzzy logic navigation system and session
5 concludes the paper and suggests future works

Fig.1. One Cognitive Map

 0
w
 21
W   w31

 0
 w51

w12

w13

0

0
0
w42
w52

0
0
0
w53

0
0
0
0

n

0 
0 
0 

w45 
0 

(1)

)

(2)

Ai  f ( ( A j  W ji ) + Aiprevious
j 1
j i

2 Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
Where k is the counter of iterations, n is the
number of nodes in the graph, Wij is the weight of
the arc that connects the concept Cj and Ci, Ai (Aiprevious) is the value of concept (Ci) at the current
(previous) iteration and the function f is a sigmoid
type function

Cognitive maps were initially proposed by
Axelrod (1976) to represent words, thoughts, tasks,
or other items linked to a central concept and willing
radially around this concept. Axelrod developed also
a mathematical treatment for these maps, based in
graph theory, and operations with matrices. These
maps can thus be considered as a mathematical model
of "belief structure" of a person or group, allowing
you to infer or predicting the consequences that this
organization of ideas represented in the universe.
This mathematical model was adapted for inclusion
of Fuzzy logic uncertainty through by Kosko (1986)
generating widespread fuzzy cognitive maps. Like the
original, FCMs are directional graph, in which the
numeric values are fuzzy sets or variables. The
"graph nodes", associated to linguistic concepts, are
represented by fuzzy sets and each "node" is linked
with other through connections. Each of these connections has a numerical value (weight), which represents a fuzzy variable related to the strength of the
concepts. A cognitive map example is given in Figure
1 and its connection matrix or equivalent weights
matrix is given by equation (1).
The concepts of a cognitive map can be updated
through the iteration with other concepts and with its
own value. This is given by the equation (2) where
the causal relationships are represented by the weight
of the summation. In short, the values of the concepts
will evolve after several iterations until normally stabilize a fixed point or a cycle limit.

f ( x) 

1
1 + e  x

(3)

In this context, a FCM uses a structured knowledge representation through causal relationships being calculated mathematically from matrix operations, unlike much of intelligent systems whose
knowledge representation is based on rules if-then
type. However, due to this rigid knowledge representation by means of graph and matrix operation, the
FCM based inference models lack robustness in presence of dynamic modifications not a priori modeled
Chun-Mei (2008). To circumvent this problem, this
article develops a new type of FCM in which concepts and causal relationships are dynamically inserted into the graph from the occurrence of events.
In this way, the new event driven-fuzzy cognitive
map model is able to dynamically acquire and use the
heuristic knowledge. The proposed ED-FCM and its
application in autonomous navigation will be developed and validated in the following sections.

2062

Table 1. Building FCM models

2.1 FCM in Intelligent Obstacle Navigation

Step 1 Identification of concepts and their roles (input, output, and selection),
their interconnections,
andor selection of relationships determining their
causal nature (positive, negative, neutral).
Step 2 Initial data acquisition, through expert opinion and  or
analysis of a mathematical model, or data analysis.
Step 3 Submission of data concerning the views of various
experts to a logical fuzzy system that has as output
the values of FCM weights.
Step 4 Treatment of information, adaptation and optimization
of FCM by adjusting their answers to the desired output.
Step 5 Validation of FCM model that is tested in the operation conditions of the system modeled.

As Some related works which use cognitive
maps in the robotics research area can be found in the
literature. Among them, we can cite the work in Min
and co workers (2006) that employs probabilistic
FCM in the decision-making of a robot soccer team.
These actions are related to the behavior of the team,
such as kick the ball in presence of opponents. The
probabilistic FCM aggregates a likelihood function to
update the concepts of the map A Fuzzy cognitive
map is used by Yeap and co workers (2000) and Pipe
(2000) to guide an autonomous robot. The FCM is
designed from a priori knowledge of experts and afterwards it is refined by a genetic algorithm. Despite
of the use of a known trajectory, actions are necessary due to errors and uncertainties inherent in the
displacement of the robot, such as slippage, reading
errors of the sensors, among others. A review of other
related works employing intelligent navigation in
robotics can be found in Yeap, Wong and Schmidt
(2000). This paper also presents a Cognitive Map to
implement a 3-D representation of the environment
where an autonomous robot must navigate. The described architecture use a previously stored neural
network based model to implement adjustments and
course corrections of the robot in presence of noise
and sensor errors. Similar to these works, we also use
a fuzzy cognitive map to navigation tasks. However
our navigation system does not use a priori information about the environment. The FCM represent the
usual navigation actions as turn right, turn left, accelerate and others. The adaptation ability to environment changes and to take decisions in presence of
random events is reached by means of a rule based
system. These rules are triggered in accordance of
intensity of the sensor measurements.

The initial FCM after execution of steps 1 to 4
is showed in figure 2. The input concepts are SL, SR
and SF and the output concepts are OutLeft, OutRigth
and OutFront. The values of the concepts are the readings of the corresponding sensors. As a fuzzy number,
these values are normalized into the interval 0, 1. The
relationships among these concepts are modeled by
weights w1 to w5 which are computed by equation (2).
It is worthwhile to note in figure 2, that the concepts
O.L. (-1) and O.R. (-1) are the values of the concepts in
the previous state. This representation is equivalent to
insert negative values (-1) in the corresponding diagonal
positions of matrix W in equation (2). We choose to
retain this representation to highlight that some concepts has memory. In this case, the mobile can remember the actions taken to turn left or right and a zig-zag
motion is prevented. As a result the mobile can maintain a movement trend.
In order to model the adaptation ability, we
introduce 3 new concepts into the FCM associated to an
intensity of motion (acceleration or braking) at each
direction. There are left factor, right factor and front
factor in figure 2. The factor concepts have their values
changed according to the current condition of the vehicle motion and the occurrence of events. These events
are modeled by the weights ws in figure 2 which are
obtained by applying the rules of type IF-THEN based
on linguistic terms. These rules represent some decisions such as if the mobile is turning right because the
left sensor has detected an obstacle and suddenly the
right sensor also detects an obstacle then the factor right
is small (ws3). The default value to factor concepts is
one. If any rule is triggered the weights ws are null.
Finally the outputs of the ED-FCM are the product between the factor concepts and the output of classical
FCM (OutLeft, OutRigth and OutFront).
In conclusion, the proposed ED-FCM navigation system
confers to the robotvehicle the following behavior

2.2 The ED-FCM Model
The development of a FCM model follows the
steps listed in table 1. In the step 1, we identify 3
inputs related to the description of the environment
(presence of obstacles) and 3 outputs describing the
mobiles movements turn left, turn right and move
forward. The three inputs take values from the three
sensors located at left, right and front side of the mobile. These concepts are connected by arcs representing the actions of acceleration (positive) and braking
(negative). Three decisions are originally modeled, if
left sensor accuses an obstacle in this position, the
vehicle must turn to the right side and equally if the
right sensor accuses an obstacle in the right side, the
vehicle turns to the other side. The direction change
decision implies smoothly vehicle deceleration. The
third decision is related to a free obstacle environment in this case the mobile follows a straight line
accelerating smoothly.






2063

The mobile is autonomous and it moves into
unknown environment from an origin point
to an end point.
If an obstacle is detected by the sensors in
front, left andor right positions the mobile
must take a decision about new direction to
follow.
Default navigation position is in a straight
line with constant speed, i.e. lateral move-







ments are used only as a result of obstacle
detection.
When the mobile is in motion and the sensors dont identify any obstacle, the mobile
accelerates smoothly and then it remains in a
constant speed.
Motion trend corresponds to an average between the current movement values and the
values in immediately before instant, which
prevents any sharp changes in direction of
the mobile navigation.
When the mobile is turning in left or right
direction and the opposite sensor detects an
obstacle, the motion trend is maintained but
the mobile is softly breaking until to reestablish a straight movement. These events are
modeled by selection relations, WS2 which
are in fact (IF-THEN) rules.

The Causal Relationship block represents
the structured knowledge about navigation. Thus,
according to the inference result, control actions are
sent to the actuator by means of an output interface.
A system of autonomous navigation using
fuzzy logic was implemented in order to assess performance, outcomes and differences in acquisition
and processing of empirical knowledge used in developing the tool presented fuzzy logic. In this context, The Work of the Harish and co workers (2008)
is similar and presents a fuzzy control strategy similar, but only to calculate the desired speed mobile
using 8 rules and input variables as the turning angle
and distance of the obstacle. The Fuzzy system is
implemented in this work is type Mandani with 3
inputs, 3 outputs and employs 23 rules for abstraction
of the same heuristic logic navigation controller inserted in the ED-FCM. The inputs are the sensors,
right, left and front and outputs are turning right, left
and accelerate. These rules were implemented in an
intuitive way according to heuristic ED-FCM. For
example, four rules taken from the complete rulebase
(23 rules)





IF the right sensor is strong then turn left
strong.
IF the right sensor is weak then turn left
weak.
IF right sensor and frontal sensor very
strong then weak accelerate and turn left
very strong
IF right, left and frontal sensor weak then
accelerate Strong.

Fig.2. The proposed ED-FCM

Intelligent control architecture to the navigation
system is shown in Figure 3. The input interface read
the sensor measurements which are inversely proportional to the distance of obstacles. The ED-FCM is
the inference engine that gathers the input data and
the knowledge (values of weights W and WS) to take
a decision about the movement of the robotvehicle.
The Rule Base block represents the heuristic knowledge to take decision in presence of conflicting
events.
Fig 4. Surface Fuzzy (sensor right, left  turn right, left)

Figure 4 shows the behavior of dynamic fuzzy system
through two outputs (turn right and turn left), with
input from the sensors right and left.
3 Simulation results
The 2-D animation simulated environment has
been designed to test and validate our proposed navigation system. In this environment, the asterisks with
lighter shade represent the obstacles. The mobile is represented by the memory of movement through a three

Fig 3. ED-FCM Navigation System Architecture

2064

strong tones trail. In the experiment with a dynamic
obstacle, that is the obstacle is in movement, one blue
trail also appears in the figure 5, 6. The dimension of
the scenario is given in centimeters.
The kinematic equations simulating the robot
dynamic behavior has been inspired by Malhotra and
Sarkar (2005). In fact, the simulated robot corresponds
to a mobile platform with two micro metal gearmotors,
and three sensors, one frontal, and two in each side
similar to the educational robot in SPARKFUNEletronics (2009). The sensors are ultrasound ones, and thus
the perception of barrier or obstacle exist only within a
scope zone of sensor. Moreover the intensity of the
sensor measure is inversely proportional to the distance
of the object.
This simulation environment has served initially to knowledge acquisition through observation data
input and output, and observation of robot behavior in
several situations. Afterwards, two experiments were
performed to validate the ED-FCM and Fuzzy System
navigation systems. In the first and second experiments,
two different scenarios with static and dynamics obstacles have been simulated.
The first experiment a dynamic obstacle is
randomly inserted into the environment, during the robot navigation. The results are presented in figures 5
and 6. The second experiment the obstacle with coordinates (4,100) is surprise, thus after the mobile executed
half of the trajectory, this object enters in scenario. The
results are presented in figures 7 and 8. In these figures,
the left graphic shows the scenario (x-y plan) with the
initial (10,0) and end point ( near 0,160) of the robot
trajectory. The graphic shows the dynamic trajectory
followed by the robot. The apparent flaws in the trajectory represent the speedup, when sensors do not "see"
an obstacle and the robot accelerates. In all experiments,
we consider that the robot successfully attains the target
point if its final position is into a horizontal interval -8,
+8 around the desired end point in this range.

maneuvers. These results validate the proposed navigation systems.

Fig.5. ED-FCM in dynamic trajectory

Fig.6. Fuzzy logic in dynamic trajectory

In the every scenario, example (figure 5),
there is a critical situation around the position y140.
In this case, the robot must to take the decision of to
move straight, pass between the two obstacles and
immediately to turn left to avoid a frontal barrier and
to attain the target point. By analyzing the results in
figure 5 until 8 we note that the robot takes the correct decisions.
The trend of movement of the robot is to
stay straight until the end point. But, for example, if
an obstacle begins to cross the robot trajectory in the
left position (x-15, y82), the robot makes a decision to turn to the opposite side, as shown in figure
(5, 6). In the second scenario (figure 7, 8), an obstacle appears in the position (7, 96) when the robot is
passing by (6, 88) position. The robot takes the correct decision to turn in order to avoid a collision but
it also maintains the motion trend of follow a straight
line. But the fuzzy control has more difficulty to
avoid the next obstacle (figure 7, 8). Some other scenarios with different obstacles positions and events
occurrences have been tested. Like for these 2 scenarios, the robots always get the final the target position and successful implemented collision avoidance

Fig.7. ED-FCM in static trajectory and object surprise

Fig.8. Fuzzy in static trajectory and object surprise

2065

Autonomous Mobile Robot using Type-2 Fuzzy
Logic. Engineering Letters, vol. 13, no. 2.
Axelrod, R. (1976). Structure of Decision the
Cognitive Maps of Political Elites. Princeton
University Press, New Jersey.
Chun-Mei, L. (2008). Using fuzzy cognitive map for
system control. WTOS 7, 12 (Dec. 2008), 15041515.
Harisha S.K., Ramkanth Kumar P., M. Krishna, and
S. C. Sharma. (2008). Fuzzy Logic Reasoning to
Control Mobile Robot on Pre-defined Strip Path.
Procedings of World Academy Of Science,
Engeenering and Technology Volume 32 August
2008 ISSN 2070-3740.
Kosko, B. (1986). Fuzzy Cognitive Maps, Int.J. ManMachine Studies, 24, p.65-75.
Malhotra R. and Sarkar A. (2005). . Development of
a fuzzy logic based mobile robot for dynamic
obstacle avoidance and goal acquisition in an
unstructured environment. Proceedings of the
2005 IEEEASME International Monterey,
California, USA, 24-28 July.
Mandow, A., Gomes-de-Gabriel, J.M., Martinéz,
J.L., Muoz, V.F., Ollero A., García-Cerezo, A.
(1996). The Autonomous Mobile Robot
AURORA for Greenhouse Operation. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Magazine, vol. 3, no.
4, pp. 18-28.
Min H.Q, Hui J.X, Lu Y-S, Jiang Jz. (2006).
Probability Fuzzy Cognitive Map for Decisionmaking in Soccer Robotics. Proceedings of the
IEEEWICACM International Conference on
Intelligent Agent Technology (IAT06) 0-76952748-506.
Pipe A. G. (2000). An Architecture for Building
Potential Field Cognitive Maps in Mobile
Robot Navigation. Adaptive Behavior, vol. 8,
no. 2, 173-203.
Schraff, R.D.. Mechatronics and Robotics for Service
Applications. (1994). IEEE Robotics and
Automation Magazine, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 31-35.
Siraj A., Bridges S., Vaughn, R. (2001). Fuzzy
Cognitive Maps for Decision Support in an
Intelligent
Intrusion
Detection
System,
Technical Report, Department of Computer
Science, Mississippi State University. MS
39762.
SPARKFUNElectronics.(2009).httpwww.sparkfun.
comcommerceproductinfo.php?productsid9
211.
Yeap, W. K., Wong, C. K., and Schmidt, J. (2006).
Initial experiments with a mobile robot on
cognitive mapping. In Proceedings of the 2006
International Symposium on Practical Cognitive
Agents and Robots, Perth, Australia, November
27  28.

4 Conclusion
This paper developed an autonomous navigation system based on a new type of fuzzy cognitive
maps, named event driven-fuzzy cognitive map, EDFCM. The developed ED-FCM approach adds new
types of relationships and concepts into a classical
FCM that allows modeling the human ability of to
take decision in presence of random events. The human knowledge is represented by a rule based system
that is triggered when critical situation occurs. As a
result, the inference engine adds temporally concepts
and relationships into the FCM. This approach is a
contribution of this paper to the intelligent control
area. It is not restricted to navigation systems and can
be applied to model intelligent system needing to
take decision on line.
In accordance with the results presented in
this paper, we can conclude that the proposed EDFCM architecture constitutes a flexible and robust
tool to navigation system able to process vagueness
and uncertainty in environment. One of the main advantages of the proposed approach is that the knowledge acquisition and representation is simplified by
the use of FCM models. For example, the number of
rules is fewer than Fuzzy logic controller. ED-FCM
uses structured knowledge, and uses only three rules
(one rule for each relationship selection WSn), see
figure 2. Moreover the resulting fuzzy cognitive maps
are also easy to implement and run. Thus, it is easily
embedded in a hardware robot.
The results of the two systems were similar,
a minimum benefit for the ED-FCM in the first experiment getting better align the trajectory after the
appearance of the surprise obstacle. This result is due
to its ability to adapt to events. However, in future
work we intend to explore the adaptation of the building due to its structured and develop algorithms for
adjustment of the causal relationships and  or selection factor during the execution of the mobile trajectory.
Some future works include implementing
additional functionality into the navigation system,
such as for example, a module of the energy management and monitoring of vehicle in decisionmaking refueling andor navigation speed control.
Add algorithms, for example, reinforcement learning,
for the dynamic adjustment of the causal relations of
ED-FCM. This algorithms goal to increase the adaptability of the navigation system. Experiment in real
environments conclude that future proposals.
References
Asami, S. (1994). Robots in Japan Present and
Future. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Magazine, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 22-26.
Astudillo L., Castillo O., Melin P., Alanis A., Soria
J., Aguilar L. T. (2006). Intelligent Control of an

2066