XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

SPEED NEURO-FUZZY ESTIMATOR FOR INDIRECT FLUX ORIENTED
INDUCTION MOTOR CONTROL
Fabio Lima, Walter Kaiser, Ivan Nunes da Silva, Azauri Albano de Oliveira Junior


Universidade de Sao Paulo
Escola Politecnica - Departamento de Engenharia Eletrica
Sao Paulo, SP, Brasil

Universidade de Sao Paulo
Escola de Engenharia de Sao Carlos - Departamento de Engenharia Eletrica
Sao Carlos, SP, Brasil

Emails fabio.lima1@poli.usp.br, kaiser@lac.usp.br, insilva@sc.usp.br, azuri@sc.usp.br
Abstract The wide use of induction motors in high-precision drives calls for more advanced control architectures. Probably the greatest progress made in recent years is the field oriented control (FOC) which allowed
the induction motor to move beyond the variable-speed control of Volts per Hertz drives. This work proposes the
development of an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) angular rotor speed estimator applied to a
FOC sensorless drive. An innovative multi-frequency training of ANFIS is proposed, initially for a volts per hertz
scheme and when the best inputs of ANFIS were chosen a drive system with magnetizing flux oriented control
was proposed using the ANFIS estimator. Simulations to evaluate the performance of the estimator considering
the volts per hertz and vector drive system were realized using the M atlabSimulink software. For validation
of the proposed ANFIS estimator a bench test was constructed.
Keywords

ANFIS, Neuro-Fuzzy, Speed estimation, Induction motor, Indirect Vector control, Sensorless.

Resumo A elevada utilizacao de motores de inducao em acionamentos demanda por arquiteturas de controle
mais avancadas. Provavelmente, o maior progresso realizado nas ultimas decadas foi o controle por orientacao de
campo (FOC), o qual permitiu que o motor_de_inducao fosse acionado alem do controle_de_velocidade variavel Volts
por Hertz. Esse trabalho apresenta uma proposta de desenvolvimento de um estimador_de_velocidade baseado
no sistema de inferencia neuro-fuzzy adptativo (ANFIS) para aplicacoes em acionamentos FOC indireto sem a
utilizacao de sensores. Um novo metodo de treinamento multi-frequencial do ANFIS e proposto, inicialmente
para um acionamento Volts por Hertz, e, quando as melhores variaveis para o treinamento foram escolhidas um
acionamento vetorial com orientacao no campo de entreferro foi implementado utilizando o estimador. Simulacoes
do acionamento Volts por Hertz e vetorial foram realizadas utilizando o programa M atlabSimulink. Uma
bancada de testes foi construda para a validacao_experimental do sistema com o estimador ANFIS.
Palavras-chave .

1

Introduction

ways direct and indirect. In the indirect FOC
(IFOC) the flux vector is determined through the
slip speed and the knowledge of the angular rotor speed. The rotor speed can be measured directly from the shaft motor using an encoder a
tachometer or a resolver. This measure increases
the total cost of the drive system, reduces the
safety and in several cases is unfeasible. To eliminate the mechanical sensor in vector control drives
observers and estimators of the rotor speed have
been constantly proposed in the literature. Drives
without mechanical sensors are named sensorless
drives (Vas, 1998), (Holtz, 1993).

For many years several research institutes and industries have been working in strategies of driving
the induction motor (IM) in a high performance
context. These researches have been focusing in
new control strategies, modeling of the machine,
estimation techniques as new materials and assembly methods as well.
When high performance is required vector
control of the IM is required. Several control
techniques have been proposed in the literature
for years. The most stressed of them are the
Field Oriented Control (FOC) and the Direct
Torque Control (DTC). In FOC vector control
(Vas, 1990), the torque of the machine is controlled in an indirect way. The main characteristic of this kind of control is the decoupling of the
flux and torque components of the space phasor of
stator currents. In DTC the torque is controlled
directly. The DTC is extensively used inside industries because of its fast torque response and
robustness (Buja and Kazmierkowski, 2004).
The FOC control can be implemented in two

The emerging techniques of estimation include artificial intelligence (AI) in determining
the mechanical speed. Artificial Neural Networks
(ANN) (Kim et al., 2001) and Neuro-Fuzzy systems can be applied in such task. The adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS) (Jang
et al., 1997) are presented as a good alternative
for estimating the machine parameters such as
the angular rotor speed (Purwanto et al., 2006),
(Vas, 1999). However ANFIS have been extensively used for control not for estimation (Wen

2734

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

and Uddin, 2004), (Uddin and Wen, 2005), (Uddin
and Wen, 2007), (Uddin et al., 2007), (Wen and
Uddin, 2004), (Chy and Uddin, 2009). This paper
contributes with this subject proposing a NeuroFuzzy speed estimator with an innovative development. The Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inference Systems (ANFIS) package of the M atlabSimulink
software was used to train and check the estimator
and a minimal configuration was obtained for the
membership functions of each signal input. Thus
a soft computing of the rotor speed signal can be
realized (Jang et al., 1997).
The root mean square (RMS) values of direct
and quadrature voltages and current signals are
used for training the ANFIS so a good result was
obtained for non sinusoidal voltages of the stator. To determine the ANFIS structure directly
from training data set the subtractive clustering
method (Chiu, 1994) was used. As the vector
drive system will be submitted to several reference
speeds the whole spectrum of associated frequencies was divided in equal frequency parts. This
technique has been resulted in an efficient training method.
The most used flux oriented model o IM is the
rotor flux oriented scheme due to its less dependence of machine parameter. The evaluation of
the ANFIS estimator in the magnetizing flux reference frame is one more contribution of this work.
Moreover, despite the ANN training which is sensitive to noise, the ANFIS estimator was trained
in the experimental setup with experimental data
and presented a good response under this situation.
A previous article (Lima et al., 2009) presented the simulation results of the proposed
strategy. In this article the experimental results
are being presented to validate the speed estimator.
2

Figure 1 Generic Induction Motor Model

Figure 2 Stator space phasor voltage in generic
reference frame
where usg is the space phasor of stator voltages,
urg is the space phasor of rotor voltages, sg is the
space phasor of stator flux linkage, rg is the space
d
operator, P
phasor of rotor flux linkage, p is the dt
is the number of pole-pairs, r is the rotor speed,
g is the generic reference frame angular speed,
g is the angle of generic frame, r is the rotor
angle, Rs is the stator resistance, Rr is the rotor
resistance, Ls is the stator self-inductance, Lr is
the rotor self-inductance, J is the moment of inertia, Te is the electromagnetic torque, Tl is the load
torque and B is the viscous friction coefficient.

Magnetizing Flux Oriented Control

2.1

To control the induction motor a magnetizing flux
oriented control with impressed stator currents
(Vas, 1998) is proposed. Fig. 1 presents the IM
simplified model and Fig. 2 presents the generic
reference frame for stator space phasor voltage.
Equations (1) to (4) present the machine model
in a generic reference frame and equation (5) is
the mechanical equation
usg  Rs isg + psg + jg sg

(1)

urg  Rr irg + prg + j(g  r )rg

(2)

sg  s ejg  sx + jsy

(3)

rg  r e

j(g r )

pr 

 rx + jry

1
(Te  Br  Tl )
J

Magnetizing Flux Oriented Equations

From generic reference frame equations the stator
and rotor equations in the magnetizing reference
frame was derived according to Fig. 3. Equations
(6) and (7) present the direct and quadrature components of stator voltages in the magnetizing reference frame and the equations (8) and (9) present
the quadrature and direct components of stator
currents in the magnetizing reference frame derived from rotor equations
usx  Rs isx + (Ls  Lm )pisx + Lm pimm +
+ mm (Lm  Ls )isy

(6)

(4)
usy  Rs isy + (Ls  Lm )pisy + Lm mm imm +
(5)

+ mm (Ls  Lm )isx (7)

2735

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

Figure 4 Impressed Stator Currents Drive
Figure 3 Stator and magnetizing current space
phasor

isx
imm + Tr pimm
 pisx +
 sl isy
Tr1
Tr1


isy
Tr
 isx  pisy +
sl imm
Tr1
Tr1

the characteristics of artificial neural networks and
the fuzzy systems. The number and shape of each
membership function related to the input variables can be obtained in an optimized way from
data sets of inputs and output associated with a
training algorithm. The ANFIS can approximate
all non linear systems with reduced data set, fast
response and accuracy (Hou et al., 2003).

(8)

3.1

Fig. 5 (Jang et al., 1997) presents the Sugeno
fuzzy system with two rules. Fig. 6 (Jang
et al., 1997) presents the equivalent ANFIS
system. In this figure nodes of the same layer
have similar functions, as described next.

(9)

where usx is the instantaneous value of direct
component stator voltage, usy is the instantaneous
value of quadrature component stator voltage, isx
is the instantaneous value of direct component
stator current, isy is the instantaneous value of
quadrature component stator current, imm is the
instantaneous value of magnetizing current, mm
is the magnetizing flux oriented frame angular
speed, sl is the angular slip speed, Tr is the rotor time constant and Tr1 is the rotor leakage time
constant.
2.2

ANFIS architecture

Figure 5 A two-input first-order Sugeno fuzzy
model with two rules

Impressed Stator Currents Drive

From equations (8) and (9) it is possible to obtain the magnetizing-flux-oriented control scheme
with impressed stator currents (Vas, 1998). The
equation (8) can be presented in terms of stator
current direct axis component (10)
isx 

(1 + Tr p)imm + isy Tr1 s1
1 + Tr1 p

(10)

where s1 is given by (11)
s1 

(1 + Tr1 p)isy
Tr imm  Tr1 isx

Figure 6 Equivalent ANFIS architecture
(11)

Layer 1 . Every node i in this layer is an adaptive node with a node function

The schematic representation of the proposed
drive (Vas, 1998) is presented in figure 4.
3

O1,i  Ai (x),
for i  1, 2, or
O1,i  Bi2 (y),
for i  3, 4,

ANFIS Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy
Inference System

(12)

where x (or y) is the input node i and Ai (or
Bi2 ) is a linguistic label associated with this
node. Parameters in this layer are referred to
as premise parameters.

It is presented now the ANFIS concepts as proposed in (Jang et al., 1997). The ANFIS gather

2736

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

Layer 2 . Q
Every node in this layer is a fixed labeled , whose output is the product of all
the incoming signals
O2,i  i  Ai (x)Bi (y)

the dimension of the problem under consideration
(Chiu, 1994).
Considering a collection of n data points x1 ,
. . . ,xn  in an M -dimensional space, each one normalized within a hypercube, sice each data point
is a candidate for cluster centers, a density measure at data point xi is defined as

i  1, 2. (13)

Each node output represents the firing
strength of a rule.



k xi  xj k2
Di 
exp 
(ra 2)2
j1
n
X

Layer 3 . Every node in this layer is a fixed node
labeled N . The ith node calculates the ratio
of the ith rules firing strength to the sum of
all rules firing strength
O3,i  i 

i
,
1 + 2

i  1, 2.

where ra is a positive constant. After the density
measure of each data point has been calculated,
the data point with highest density measure is selected as the first cluster center. The process goes
on selecting new cluster centers.

(14)

Layer 4 . Every node i in this layer is an adaptive node with a node function
O4,i  i fi  i (pi x + qi y + ri ),

6

(15)

Layer 5 . The single
P node in this layer is a fixed
node labeled , which computes the overall
output as the summation of all incoming signals
X
i fi 
overall output  O5,i 
i

4

(16)

Hybrid Learning Algorithm

From the ANFIS system shown in Fig. 6 with
fixed premise parameters values, the overall output can be expressed as a linear consequent of the
consequent parameters. The output f in Figure 6
can be rewritten as
2
1
f1 +
f2
1 + 2
1 + 2
 1 (p1 x + q1 y + r1 ) + 2 (p2 x + q2 y + r2 )
 (1 x)p1 + (1 y)q1 + (1 )r1 + ...
... + (2 x)p2 + (2 y)q2 + (2 )r2 (17)

Table 1 Induction motor parameters
Parameter
Value
Rs
0.4
Rr
0.416
Ls
0.00178H
Lm
0.0629H
Lr
0.00178H
Power
5HP
P
1
J
0.4Kgm2
Rated voltage
220V
Rated frequency
60Hz

f

which is linear in the consequent parameters p1 ,
q1 , r1 , p2 , q2 , e r2 .
5

Neuro-Fuzzy Estimator Inputs

Before using the ANFIS in the vector drive a
preliminar study for choosing the best inputs of
the ANFIS and validating the proposed training
method was made in a simple volts per hertz drive
with sinusoidal voltages. The ANFIS package of
M atlabSimulink software was used to training
and validation of the neuro-fuzzy estimator and
the RMS values of direct and quadrature voltages and currents in a stationary reference frame
was chosen as the best ones in terms of output
response and minimal ANFIS configuration.
The training strategy consisted in an innovative use of a set of different final frequency commands for the volts per hertz drive. Thus the
training set consists of the summed responses for
drive frequencies from five to sixty hertz in steps
of five hertz. Fig. 7, 8 and 9 present the membership functions of the inputs, the training and
checking results for the ANFIS estimator, respectively. The speed estimated was presented in p.u.
units.
The table 1 presents the machine parameters
used in simulation.

where i is a normalized firing strength from
layer 3 and pi , qi , ri  is the parameter set of
this node. Parameter in this layer are referred
to as consequent parameters.

P
i fi
 Pi
i i

(18)

Subtractive clustering

For generating the membership functions for each
input the subtractive clustering method was used.
By using this method of clustering the computational burden is reduced because it is proportional
to the number of data points and independent of

After training and validation the ANFIS other
final speeds were presented to the volts per hertz
scheme to try the generalization of the estimator.

2737

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

driving scheme. The estimated speed and calculated speed from the model was presented in Fig.
10.

Figure 7 Membership functions

Figure 10 Speed responses for 58hz command

7

Sensorless Drive with Neuro-Fuzzy
Estimator

After the early investigation of the best input variables and the validation of frequency spectrum division for training the ANFIS the same characteristic inputs were used in the indirect magnetizingflux-oriented control scheme with a current regulator. It was observed that the best results is
obtained with a recurrent ANFIS system because
the drive dynamics. So the ANFIS used in simulation was trained with the RMS values of voltages and currents plus the speed response with
one sample time delay. The speed controller used
in simulation is a PI controller and it was used
a 100s sample time. To try the generalization
of the estimator and evaluate the low speed response with load a 6 rads command (which do
not belong to training data set) was imposed to
the drive. Fig. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 presents
the estimator test for training and checking data
sets, the membership functions for currents and
voltages, a speed response for a 6 rads command
with a constant load torque of 5Nm applied at 8
seconds, the absolute speed error and finally the
currents and torque response from the drive.
In this simulation results the drive was using the rotor speed calculated from the IM model.
In the future the drive response with the ANFIS
feedback will be evaluated.

Figure 8 Estimator test for training data set

8

Figure 9 Estimator test for checking data set

Experimental Setup

For the validation of the proposed ANFIS speed
estimation a test bench was constructed. For measuring the stator voltages and currents Hall ef-

A final frequency of 58 hertz (which do not belong
to training data set) was imposed to voltshertz

2738

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

Figure 14 Speed responses for 6 rads command

Figure 11 Estimator test for training data set

Figure 15 Absolute speed error

Figure 12 Estimator test for checking data set

Figure 16 Torque and currents from drive
Figure 13 Membership functions
National Instruments (NIDAQ6062E). The IFOC
control algorithm and the ANFIS estimator was
performed through Real Time Workshop Toolbox

fect sensors were used. The acquisition of all signals is made by a digital acquisition card from

2739

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

from M atlabSimulink software. A sample time
of 200s was used. The experimental tests were
performed using a low power (200W) IM. Figure 17 and 18 presents the block diagram and
an overview of the test bench constructed, respectively. The speed signal was acquired using
a tachometer sensor coupled to the motor shaft.

the training data set so a good generalization was
achieved.

IM
VSI Inverter

Curent
Hal

Pulses

Vota
lge
Hal

M

NIDAQcard
6062E
PCMCIA
Interface

Figure 19 Experimental speed responses for 47Hz
command - VF drive

Figure 17 Overview of the experimental setup

VOLTAGE HALL
SENSORS

MIT

CURRENT HALL
SENSORS

THS720P
SCOPE

TACHOGENERATOR

Figure 20 Experimental speed responses for 58Hz
command - VF drive
Finally the IFOC scheme was imposed to
drive the IM. Still using the tachometer in the
control scheme a ANFIS speed estimator was
trained using experimental data at rated speed. 21
presents the measured speed from the tachometer
r an the estimated speed by ANFIS r .

Figure 18 Overview of the experimental setup

9

Experimental Results

The first results extracted from the experimental setup are related to the Volts per Hertz drive.
An important observation at this point is related
to the fact that only experimental data was presented to the ANFIS training. This fact is an
advantage when compared to the ANN training.
When training a ANN speed estimator the noise
presented in the experimental data could invalidate the estimator response (Goedtel et al., 2007).
The subtractive clustering make the noise data
points have low density when comparing to other
data points. Indeed the degree of membership of
these noise points are low as their influence in the
output response as well. Figs. 19 and 20 present
the estimated experimental response r for a 47Hz
and 58Hz command, respectively. Its important
to stress that these commands do not belong to

Figure 21 Experimental speed responses for rated
speed command - IFOC drive

2740

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

10

Internaional Conference on Neural Networks
and Signal Processing pp. 510512.

Conclusions

This paper presented an efficient ANFIS estimator for rotor angular speed of induction motors. A
previous investigation of better inputs for the ANFIS system was made and the direct and quadrature RMS values of stator voltages and currents
in stationary reference frame was considered. It
was used a partitioned spectrum of frequencies for
training the ANFIS estimator. It was observed a
fast training and low error associated. Furthermore a reduced number of membership functions
was created by subtractive clustering method. Finally a magnetizing flux oriented control with impressed stator currents was simulated and a ANFIS system was trained using the same inputs
from the Volts per Hertz scheme. To better response a recurrent ANFIS with an one sample
time speed delay is considered at that moment.
The proposed ANFIS estimator differs from the
others estimation methods in simplicity and robustness as presented. The fact of training the
ANFIS estimator in the experimental setup using only experimental data is one more important
contribution of this work.

Jang, T. S. R., Sun, C. T. and Mizutani, E. (1997).
Neuro-Fuzzy and soft computing - A computational approach to learning and machine intelligence, Prentice Hall.
Kim, S. H., Park, T., Yoo, J. Y. and Park, G.
(2001). Speed-sensorless vector control of an
induction motor using neural network speed
estimation, IEEE Transactions on industrial
electronics 48(3) 609614.
Lima, F., Kaiser, W., Silva, I. N. and Junior,
A. A. O. (2009). Development of a speed
neurofuzzy estimator for sensorless magnetizing flux induction motor control, 35th Annual Conference of IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 2009. IECON 2009. pp. 3273
3278.
Purwanto, E., Yukihiko, S., Herry, P. M. and
Prabowo, G. (2006). The development of
speed sensor observer for induction motor by
using adaptive neuro fuzzy with back propagation learning method, 8th International
Conference on Properties and applications of
Dielectric Materials, 2006 pp. 787792.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank University of Sao
Paulo for financial support.

Uddin, M. N., Huang, Z. R. and Chy, M. M. I.
(2007). A simplified self-tuned neuro-fuzzy
controller based speed control of an induction motor drive, IEEE Power Engineering
Society General Meeting pp. 18.

References
Buja, G. and Kazmierkowski, M. (2004). Direct
torque control of pwm inverter-fed ac motors
- a survey, IEEE Transactions on industrial
electronics 51(4) 744757.

Uddin, M. N. and Wen, H. (2005). Model reference
adaptive flux observer based neuro-fuzzy controller for induction motor drive, Fourtieth
IAS Annual Meeting. Conference Record of
the 2005 IEEE Industry Applications Conference 2 12791285.

Chiu, S. L. (1994). Fuzzy model identification
based on cluster estimation, Journal of itelligent fuzzy systems 2(3).

Uddin, M. N. and Wen, H. (2007). Development
of a self-tuned neuro-fuzzy controller for induction motor drives, IEEE Transactions on
industry applications 43(4) 11081116.

Chy, M. and Uddin, M. (2009). Development
and implementation of a new adaptive intelligent speed controller for ipmsm drive,
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications
3 11061115.

Vas, P. (1990). Vector Control of AC Machines,
Oxford, U. K.

Goedtel, A., Silva, I. N., Serni, P. J. A. and Nascimento, C. F. (2007). Neural approach for
speed estimation in induction motors, Seventh International Conference on Intelligent
Systems Design and Applications, ISDA 2007
pp. 561566.

Vas, P. (1998). Sensorless Vector and Direct
Torque Control, Oxford Univ. Press.
Vas, P. (1999). Artificial-Intelligence-Based Electrical Machines and Drives, Oxford Univ.
Press.

Holtz, J. (1993). Speed estimation and sensorless
control of ac drives, International conference
on industrial electronics, control and instrumentation, IECON 93 2 649654.

Wen, H. and Uddin, M. N. (2004). Adaptive enhanced fuzzy sliding-mode control
for electrical servo drive, Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering
3 12251228.

Hou, Z., Shen, Q. and Li, H. (2003). Nonlinear
system identification based on anfis, IEEE

2741