XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

USE OF PETRI NET MODELLING TECHNIQUES AND SUSTAINABILITY INDEXES TO EVALUATE PERFORMANCE
IN INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Edson H. Watanabe12, Fabricio Junqueira1, Diolino J. dos Santos Filho1,
Paulo E. Miyagi1

1

University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
e-mail edsonh.watanabe, fabri, diolinos, pemiyagi@ usp.br),
2
Federal Institute of Sanata Catarina, Joinville, SC, Brazil
e-mail edsonh.ifsc.edu.br
Abstract Currently, the productive systems (PSs) performance must be concerned to sustainability indicators related to environmental (for reduction of negative impacts in conservation of energy and natural resources), technological (for best management in use practices of equipment and tools), social (for safety assurance of employees, communities and consumers) and economical (for business feasibility and profitability). However, industrial standards do not explicitly consider how to treat sustainability indicators in PS design and its control system. Therefore, this paper proposes a framework to systematize the performance
evaluation process for industrial PS considering indicators that qualify and quantify its sustainability. The framework adopts Petri
net technique and its extension named production flow schema (PFS), and extensions of the standard ANSIISA95. Simulationbased analysis, decision making techniques and a PSs classification based on product green seal are also considered. Furthermore, the framework considers the information processing, storing and access of each component using a Cyber Physical Technology (CPT) due the trend of PSs to be, in fact, a network of companies that are, in general geographically dispersed.
Keywords Sustainability indexes, Petri net, performance evaluation, modelling techniques, cloud computing, sustainable productive system
Resumo Atualmente os Sistemas Produtivos (SPs) devem se preocupar com os indicadores de sustentabilidade relacionados
aos fatores ambiental (para redução de impactos negativos em conservação_de_energia e recursos naturais), tecnológico (para gerenciamento das melhores práticas no uso de equipamentos e ferramentas), social (para garantia de segurança aos trabalhadores,
comunidades e clientes) e econômico (para acompanhar a viabilidade e lucratividade dos negócios). Como, as normas industriais
não explicitem como tratar indicadores de sustentabilidade em projeto de SP e seu sistema_de_controle. Assim, este trabalho propõe um framework para sistematizar o processo de avaliação_de_desempenho considerando os indicadores que qualificam e quantificam a sua sustentabilidade. O framework adota a técnica de Rede de Petri e sua a extensão PFS (Production Flow Schema), e
extensões da norma ANSIISA-95. Também é considerada a análise baseada em simulação, as técnicas de tomada de decisões e
um modo de classificação do SP baseada em um selo de produção sustentável. Além disto, o framework considera o processamento de informações, armazenamento e acesso a cada componente usando a Cyber Physical Technology (CPT) devido a tendência dos SPs serem, na verdade, uma rede de empresas, que estão geralmente geograficamente dispersos.
Palavras Chave  Introduction
Industrial Productive Systems (PSs) have been
modified over time to include innovation (Goldstone,
2002), such as serialization, standardization and
reconfiguration capabilities. From the mid-80s, due
to tendency scarcity of raw materials, nongovernmental organizations, such as Roman Club,
have warned about the need to include sustainability
in the PS design (Goldstone, 2002) (Senge et al.,
2001) (McDonough and Braungart, 1998). Thereby
arose governmental initiatives through the United
Nations (UN) such as World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED, 1987), and
events as Rio 92, Kyoto 97 and more recently Doha
2015. Currently, the PSs performance must be concerned to sustainability indicators, such as reduction
of negative impacts in conservation of energy and
natural resources, management practices for safety
assurance of employees, communities and consumers
and best practices business feasibility and profitability). However, industrial standards like ANSIISA95
do not explicitly consider how treat sustainability
indicators into the PS design and its control system
ISSN 2525-8311

(ANSIISA, 2005). Therefore, this paper proposes a
framework to systemize the PS sustainability performance evaluation. The framework considers enhancement of PS design requirements related to sustainability, adoption of Production Flow Schema
(PFS) and Petri Net (PN) modelling techniques,
extensions in the ANSIISA95 standard in order to
include sustainability indicators. To evaluate the
sustainability of PSs, a set of indicators must be
measured to quantify and qualify the PS performance
related to them. In the adopted approach, the modelling process describes a practical and systemized way
of assessing the performance of a sustainable PS by
monitoring the indicators in accordance with four
dimensions environmental, economical, social and
technological, which is usually considered three
dimensions called Triple Bottom Line (TBL) by
Elkington (1997). In turn, these indicators must be
used to guarantee certain grade of sustainability for
PSs, positive impact on the environment, satisfaction
of the employees, proper use of technology and profitable manufactured products. Thereby the framework also supports product classification based on
sustainability seal. The performance and sustainability evaluation is based on computational environment

2563

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

of Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) with cloud computing infrastructure, where data processing, storing
and accessing is done in wherever geographical location.
The text is structured in sections section 2
shows a list of sustainability indicators defined for
general PSs. Section 3 shows the framework considered for the systematization of performance evaluation process and presents a green seal to register
sustainability in PSs. Section 4 describes an example
of use the simulation and analysis techniques. Section 5 reports the conclusions and further works.
2 Sustainability Indicators Metrics
Sustainability in PS, according to the US Department of Commerce (US, 2009), involves the
creation of manufactured products that use processes
that minimize negative environmental impacts, saving energy and nature resources and to be safe to
employees, communities and consumers. Also, this
provides benefits to the company from an economic
point of view. According to WCED (1987), sustainable manufacturing can be understood as all types of
productive activity that minimizes diverse business
risks inherent to any manufacturing operation, while
maximizing new opportunities that increase results of
its processes and products results. In its operations is
adopted the 6R methodology (Javal, 2010) over
products life-cycle since the production until discharge by market, the 6Rs cycle is following
1- Reduce is related to the reduced use of energy and
materials during manufacturing and the reduction of
waste during the use stage
2- Reuse is related to the reuse of product or its
components to reduce the usage of new raw materials
to produce new products
3- Recycle refers the process to convert material
considered waste to build a new product
4- Recover refers in disassemblies for collecting and
utilization obsolete products
5- Redesign refers to simplify pos-use processes
with application of techniques to make a more sustainable product
6- Remanufacture involves re-processing of already
used products for restoration to their original characteristics.
Figure 1 shows the evolution of different manufacturing concepts and their contributions to stakeholder
value, and the proposed closed-loop system involving 6Rs. The production activities are
 Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)  Management function of all company business activities,
 Production Control and Planning (PCP)  Production planning activities according to a demand
schedule,
 Warehouse of materials with identification code 
Stores materials separated for attending production
line,
ISSN 2525-8311

 Reception of materials and checking  Preparing
and checking materials to be sent to production
line,
 Productive System (PS)  System arrangement to
produce products,
 Warehouse of products  Stores traceable products
to be sent to market,
 Distribution  enterprises network to put products
at the market,
 Disassemble products  Dismounts products received from external agents,
 External products collection  Products entry from
a external collection system,
 Discard materials  Faulty materials and,
 TreatmentDisposal  Treats materials before disposal.

Figure. 1. Sustainable Production Cycle

According to (Veleva, 2000), sustainability indicators have three main objectives raise awareness
and understanding, inform decision-making, and
measure progress toward established goals. These
indicators are qualitative or quantitative values used
to evaluate the sustainability aspects of a system
(OBrien, 1999). However, according to (Amrina and
Yusof, 2011), the measure of the sustainability is
more than just a set of indicators and there are different approaches to be considered, such as the definition of the actions set, in which the indicators must
be verified. For e.g., (Joung et al., 2013) states that
the result of this measurement should support the
identification of specific areas to apply enhancements related to sustainability in PS activities. Analyzing the data achieved and its interpretation is other
fundamental phase, since the difficulties are due to
the complexity related to definition of several indicators (OECD, 2001) (OECD, 2011). Interrelationships may bring the conclusions about the
level of sustainability and decisions of future improvements.

2564

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Based on (Tan et al., 2015) and other references,
thus, a new list of indicators was defined and it is
showed at table 1(a, b, c, d). A list of indicators
which can be used to any PS in general, considering
sustainability in four dimensions environmental,
economical, social and technological. For example
through the table 1 (a) in the sub-category resource
consumption is possible to determine the Energy
intensity index by dividing energy consumed and
unit of product (kWhunit). Thus, for each indicator
chosen it is necessary to determine the index based
on demand of the production.
(a)

TABLE 1
PS Sustainability indicators  Environmental aspect

Sub-category
Emission and
Pollution

Indicator

Quantification Method

gas
Greenhouse
emissions
Waste Water discharged
Waste material

Mass of CO2 equivalents emitted
Volume of waste water
discharged
Any type of material
that is discharged

Reusedrecycled
materials used in
products
Packaging materials
discarded

Unit of product Mass
of
reusedrecycled
materials used
Unit of product Mass
of packaging materials
discarded
Unit of product Mass
of packaging materials
reused
Total energy consumed
that
is
directly
attributable to the
manufacturing process
Energy consumedUnit
of product
Volume
of
water
consumedUnit
of
product
Total volume of water
reused

Material costs

Energy costs
Labour costs
Operational and
capital costs

(c)

PS Sustainability indicators Social (Well-being) aspect

Sub-category
Employee

Lost workdays

Labour Accidents
Labour
productivity
Training in
sustainability

Resource
Consumption

energy
Total
consumption
Energy intensity
Water intensity

Water reused

(b)

Indicator

Quantification Method

Carbon footprint
benefit

Financial gain in reduction of quantity of
carbon gas emission
Financial gain in
quantity of reused
material
Financial gain in
quantity of disposed
material
Financial gain in
quantity of recycled
material
Financial gain in
quantity traditional
energy economy in
relation renewable
Financial gain in
quantity traditional
energy economy

Reused Material
economy
Disposal waste
economy
Recycled material
economy
Renewable
Energy Benefit
Traditional
energy reduction
Manufacturing
cost

ISSN 2525-8311

Quantification Method
Number of missed
workdays due to
accidents.
Labour humor survey
during hours
Number of occurrences
during workday
(Total revenueTotal
labour costs)
(Employees trained in
sustainability Total
number of
employees)x100

Customer
Customer
complaints

Total number of customer
complaints related to
sustainability
performance

Sustainability
reports publishing

Total number of
published assessments
and reports and  of
completion of these
sustainability
assessments.

Community

(d)

PS Sustainability indicators Technological aspect

Sub-category
Productivity

Indicator
Sustainable TI
Policy application

PS Sustainability indicators  Economic aspect

Sub-category
Financial
Performance

Indicator

Job satisfaction

Packaging materials
reused

Costs of acquiring
materials (including
water and packaging)
used within
manufacturing process
Costs of energy used in
production process
Costs of labour used
during manufacturing
process
Costs of operation and
capital used during
manufacturing process

Employee
environmental
suggestions

Quantification Method
Total number of actions
complaints related to
sustainability
performance
Total number of
employees suggestions
regarding sustainability
improvements

Performance
Update of software
and hardware
version
Innovation  RD
investments
Environmentally
certified service
providers

Number of product
updatedNumber of
product installed
Total amount of RD
investments for
sustainability efforts
(Number of providers
with EMS Total
number of
providers)x100

Production
line
Maintenance
program policy
Avoid line stops due
to safety concerns
Fail prognosis
police

Number of equipments
inspectedNumber of
equipments installed
Monitor security around
manufacturing
machineries
Monitor equipment
work cyclewear during
manufacturing process

2565

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

According to (Joung et al., 2013), the grade of
sustainability may be used as a metric to evaluate the
performance of PS. There are a pattern set of processes performance indicators, called Key Performance Indicator (KPI), which are measured to quantify and to qualify process performance evaluation.
In the ISO standards (ISO, 2010) (ISO, 2014), the
performance measure is treated as part of an industrial process creation value.
3 Performance Evaluation Systematization
According to organizational structure of a industrial company (ANSIISA, 2005), the production
information is processed at level 3 Manufacturing
Execution System (MES). The results from the production performance analysis executed at MES are
sent to the business level (upper level) that assists
managers to make decisions (Figure 2, on the left
side). The proposed innovation of this work are the
level 3 are reviewed and re-interpreted to include a
Sustainability Management System (SMS) module to
treat sustainability, which is responsible for processing the data collected from the lower levels to
calculate the sustainability indicators through information from PS infrastructure. In case of any indicators discrepancy, the SMS acts close to the existing
MES modules in order to indicate and notify the
higher level and to send commands for lower levels
in accordance to directive established by the business
level.

the disperse system to ensure compatibility among
them
 "execution
management",
that
coordinates
interactions among the SMS sub-modules and
equipment located on inferior levels.
3.1 A Framework
PSs can be approached as a Discrete Event System (DES) (Miyagi, 2001) (Morales et al., 2007)
(Villani et al., 2007) and based on this, Petri Net
(PN) technique (Silva, 2013) can adopted as a tool to
systematize the modelling procedure, analysis and
control specification (Figure 3). In fact, there are
other techniques to model DES, but when the implementation of control solutions in industrial process
are relevant, the models based on PN are considered
the most effective and easy way to program industrial controllers (Leitão and Colombo, 2006 Lira, D. et
al., 2008). Even though, the introduction of the sustainability concept does not change the nature of PS,
its consideration at the system design stage is not
trivial. Therefore, is presented in Fig. 3 the framework for the performance evaluation of sustainable
PS. This Figure also shows a simplified flow of information.
The proposed framework (Figure 3) to perform
evaluation of sustainable and dispersed PSs (Da
Silva, R. M. et al., 2015). considers
1. Data survey about the physical machine
operations and types of technologies involved in
the processes. Based on this information,
indicators are defined. The environmental
resources data, materials and processes compose
the environmental information and are previously
defined.

Figure 2  ANSIISA-95 norm and the proposed SMS module.

The SMS is composed by sub-modules
 "sustainability indicators data collecting", that
stores the PS indicators data
 "sustainability
performance
analysis",
that
calculates the performance of the PS based on data
received from both the MES and PS sustainability
indicators
 "sustainability indicators definition", that deliveries
the interface of a performance and a evaluation of
sustainability indicators from other PSs that compose
ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 3. Framework for the analysis procedure of performance in
sustainable PSs.

2566

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

2. Processes in the PS described by PFS and then
detailed by PN models (Miyagi, P. E. (2001)).
The PN models are analyzed including the
simulation for quantitative evaluation for
different scenarios.
3. The expected KPIs related to sustainability,
which are obtained from the PN models are
stored at SMS database and used to compare the
information collected from the productive plants
on-line. It is supposed that information about the
current status of the productive plants is available
at the MES database however, there are cases
where direct communication from SMS to the
supervisory level (lower level) is necessary.
4. The evaluation of the differences among the
expected values of KPIs and measured values are
reported to superior level (level 4). Although
there are cases where some activation commands
are previously established (evidently derived
from decision of upper level). In this case, a
message must be send to MES to update the tasks
to be carried out in the PS.

The system users must access data of the PS to
evaluate the performance, simulate a new scenario
and implement improvements. All manufacturing
data must be accessed wherever they are, via internet
(Ferreira, 2013).
3.3 Green Seal
The "green seal" is an initiative to encourage industries to produce in accordance to sustainability
factors, such as economical, social, environmental
and technological. This seal is also a register that the
framework is in working order. All customers that
buy products with green seal must have the guarantee
that they are helping to keep the world to be better to
live. This way, the industry can show that is doing
something for welfare of the people and the nature,
and it produces an extra motivation for its employees
and local community (Figure 5).

3.2 Disperse PS Architecture
The Cyber Physical System (CPS) technology
can be explored in PSs to create an infrastructure for
data processing and acquisition, connecting elements
to monitor variables that will compose the
sustainability indicators. According to a cloud
computing vision, PS must explore CPS to assure a
collaborative environment to (re)configure online
productive processes that are excuted in disperse PSs
independently of its geographical localization. These
systems form the basis of emerging and future smart
services, and improve quality of life in many areas
(NIST, 2012) (Sundmaeker et al., 2013) (Colombo et
al., 2013), providing the foundation of this proposal,
including its critical infrastructure (Figure 4).

Figure 5  Example of seals according with the green representation.

4 Simulation and Result Analysis
The proposed systematization makes the performance evaluation work easier because it specifies
how to execute the evaluation process of sustainability indicators. The framework associated with the
proposed systematization support the specification
for a smart data acquisition system, well defined
equipments, sensors and data network to facilitate
flow of all information into the industrial infrastructure. The data acquisition systems work continually
while the production is operating, then at any time
the responsible staff of production administration can
log in the system and evaluates performance in any
system at network. As an analysis tool can be used
Petri editorssimulators or any other discrete event
tool. It is used IOPT (Input Output Place Transition)
web tool (GOMES et al., 2007), Petri Net tool developed by a research group from Portugal. The analysis
and reports are sent to the upper level system to
make a decision.

Figure 4  CPS technology to disperse PS - productive systems.

ISSN 2525-8311

2567

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

a)
b)
Figure 7  a) PFS measure model, b) Measure Consumption in P2
representation

This measurement structure is applied where the
sustainability indexes values are relevant to evaluate
the production line.
5 Conclusions and Further Works
b)
Figure 6  a) PSF production model, b) Production representation
using Petri Net in IOPT environment.

Figure 6 represents an example of production line
where a flow of material goes through places indicating three different productive processes P1-> P2 ->
P3, at approved situation. In each place an operation
is executed that demands energy consumption. If a
fail occur in P2, the flow is switched to P4 to repair
the material and then follows to P3. The arc between
transition point T5 and place point P1 assures the
sequence of activities. In parallel to production line,
there is a measurement system working represented
in Figure 7. The elements P5, P6, T6 and T7 represent a sensor that acts when P2 in Figure 6 starts
operation, thus the sensor reads the energy consumption and the value read is compared with a pattern
value stored in database. There are three possibilities
for the index low, normal and high. In all cases after
checking the result it is stored in database. This is
executed by tasks P8, P9 and P10 respectively. The
results stored at database will be used to make decision at upper level system (level 4).

The ANSIISA95 standard structure is reviewed
to evaluate the performance of a productive system
considering sustainability. This paper proposes a
framework that considers these indicators and defines a list of indicators which can be used to qualify
and quantify sustainability in PSs. The framework
adopts the PN modelling technique and its extension
PFS to consider the sustainable PS design, simulation-based analysis, decision making and classification techniques based on green seal of products. The
seal is a register that the framework is in working
order. In the adopted approach, the process modelling describes a practical and systematized way of
assessing the performance of a sustainable PS by
monitoring the indicators defined according to four
dimensions of sustainability environmental, economical, social and technological. This proposed
systematization makes the performance evaluation
work easier because it specifies how to execute the
evaluation process of sustainability indicators. In the
framework description is quoted the use of decision
making tool, it needs to be better explored and also
the case shown in section 4 is a small sample of simulation and analysis features that they will be detailed in further works.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank CNPq, CAPES,
FAPESP for the financial support.

a)

References
Amrina, E. and Yusof, S. M. (2011). Key Performance Indicators for Sustainable Manufacturing
Evaluation in Automotive Companies. Industrial

ISSN 2525-8311

2568

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Engineering and Engineering Management
(IEEM), IEEE International Conference on, Issue Date 6-9 Dec.
ANSIISA-95.00.03.2005. (2005). ANSI-American
National Standart Institute and ISAThe Instrumentation Systems and Automation Society. Enterprise-Control System Integration Part3 Activity Models of Manufacturing Operations Management.
Colombo A.W., Karnouskos S., Bangemann T.
(2013). A system of systems view on collaborative industrial automation, in IEEE International
Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT
2013), 2528 Feb, Cape Town, South Africa.
Da Silva, R. M. et al. (2015). Modeling of mechanisms for reconfigurable and distributed manufacturing control system. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology,
Springer, v. 450, p. 93100.
Elkington, J. (1997). Cannibals with forks The triple
bottom line of 21st century business. Capstone
Publishing Ltd, Oxford.
Ferreira, L., Putnik, G., Cunha, M., Putnik, Z., Castro, H., Alves, C., Shah, V., Varela, M.L.R.
(2013). Cloudlet architecture for dashboard in
cloud and ubiquitous. CIRP 12(2013) 366-371.
ScienceDirect.
Goldstone, J.A. (2002). Efflorescences and Economic Growth in World History Rethinking the
Rise of the West and the Industrial Revolution. Journal of World History, v.13, No.2, Fall
2002, pp. 323-389.
Gomes, L. et al. The input-output place-transition
Petri net class and associated tools. 5th IEEE International Conference on Industrial Informatics
(INDIN). p. 2732, 2007.
Jayal, A.D., Badurdeen, F., Dillon Jr, O.W.,
Jawahir, I.S. (2010). Sustainable manufacturing
Modeling and optimization challenges at the
product, process and system levels. CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology,
vol. 2, pp. 144152.
Joung, C.B. Carrell, J. Sarkar, P. Feng, S.C.
(2013). Categorization of indicators for sustainable manufacturing. Ecological Indicators.
ISO Std.22400-12010, Automation systems and
integration  Key performance indicators
(KPIs) for manufacturing operations management - Part 1 Overview, concepts and terminology, 2010.
ISO Std.22400-22014, Automation systems and
integration  Key performance indicators
(KPIs) for manufacturing operations management - Part 2 Definitions and descriptions of
key performance indicators, 2014.
Leitão, P. Colombo, A. W., (2006). Petri net based
methodology for the development of collaborative production systems. Emerging Technologies
and Factory Automation, 2006. ETFA06. IEEE
Conference on. p. 819826.
Lira, D. et al., (2008). Fault detection in flexible
assembly systems using Petri net. Latin America
Transactions, IEEE, v. 6, n. 7, p. 572 578, dec.
2008. DOI 10.1109TLA.2008.4917427
McDonough, W. and Braungart, M. (1998). The
NEXT Industrial Revolution. The Atlantic
Monthly, October 1998, V.282, No.4 pp. 82-92.
Miyagi, P. E. (2001). Controle Programável - Fundamentos do Controle de Sistemas a Eventos
Discretos. Editora Edgard Blcher, São Paulo,
Brasil.
Morales, R.A.G., Melo, J.I.G., Miyagi, P.E. (2007).
Diagnosis and Treatment of Faults in Productive
Systems based on Bayesian Networks and Petri
Net. Conference Automation Science and Engi-

ISSN 2525-8311

neering, 2007. CASE 2007. IEEE International
Conference.
NIST (2012) - National Institute of Standards and
Technology. Cloud Computing and Sustainability The Environmental Benefits of Moving to
the Cloud NIST, Cyber-Physical Systems Situation Analysis of Current Trends, Technologies,
and Challenges, National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), Columbia, Maryland.
httpevents.energetics.comNISTCPSWorkshop
pdfsCPSSituationAnalysis.pdfi.
OBrien, C. (1999). Sustainable production - a new
paradigm for a new millennium. International
Journal of Production Economics.
OECD (2001) - Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Sustainable Development Critical Issues. OECD Publishing.
OECD (2011) - Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Sustainable manufacturing toolkit - Seven steps to environmental
excellence, START-UP GUIDE. OECD Publishing.
Senge, P.M., Carstedt, G. Porter, P.L. (2001). Innovating Our Way to the Next Industrial Revolution. MIT Sloan Management Review Winter
2001 42, 2 ABIINFORM Global
pg. 24
Silva, M. (2013). Half a century after Carl Adam
Petris PhD thesis A perspective on the field.
Annual Reviews in Control, vol. 37, No.2, p.
191-219, 2013.
Sundmaeker H., Guillemin P., Fries P., Woelffle S.
(2013). Vision and challenges for realising the
internet of things, in CERP-IoT Cluster of European Research Projects on the Internet of
Things.
Tan H.X., Yeoa Z., Nga R., Tjandraa T. B., Song B.
(2015). A sustainability indicator framework for
Singapore small and medium-sized manufacturing enterprises. The 22nd CIRP conference on
Life Cycle Engineering. Procedia CIRP 29, 132
 137.
US Department of Commerce, Sustainable manufacturing initiative, in Proceedings of the 2nd
Annual Sustainable Manufacturing Summit Chicago, USA, 2009.
Veleva, V., Hart, M., Greiner, T., Crumbley, C.
(2000). Indicators of sustainable production.
Jornal of Claaner Production, vol.9, pp.447-452
Villani, E., Miyagi, P. E., Valette, R. (2007). Modelling and analysis of hybrid supervisory systems
A Petri net approach. London Springer-Verlag
London Limited.
WCED (1987) - World Comission on Environment
and Development. Our Commom Future. Oxford
and New York Oxford University Press.

2569