XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE PARAMETERS AND THE TIME DELAY OF
OSCILLATORY KINETIC ADSORPTION SYSTEMS
Joao B. M. dos Santos, Antonio M. N. Lima


Departamento de Engenharia Eletrica
Centro de Engenharia Eletrica e Informatica
Universidade Federal de Campina Grande
Av. Aprgio Veloso, 882, 58429-970 Campina Grande, PB, Brasil
Emails joaobatista@dee.ufcg.edu.br, amnlima@dee.ufcg.edu.br
Abstract The understand of adsorption kinetics and apparent formation of mono molecular biotin and bisbiotin layers onto an evaporated thin gold film onto glass substrates remain unknown. Cell membrane permeation
in some cases displays the phenomenon of overshoot and oscillation. Oscillation is an important and interesting
phenomenon observed in biological and chemical systems. An adsorption kinetics model with time delay can
be used in other to explain these phenomena. So, in this work it is proposed an estimation technique for the
adsorption kinetics model parameters including the time delay. This technique avoids the non linear estimation
problem using a recursive estimation algorithm. The proposed technique is evaluated under experimental tests.
Keywords

Adsorption Kinetics, Time Delay, Recursive Estimation, Oscillation dynamics.

Resumo A compreensao da adsorcao e da aparente formacao de camadas mono-celulares de biotin e bisbiotin
em filmes de ouro fino sobre substratos de vidro permanece desconhecida. A permeacao em membranas, em
alguns casos, resulta em comportamentos oscilatorios e com sobressinal. A oscilacao e um penomeno importante
e interessante obervado tanto em sistemas biologicos como em sistemas qumicos. Um modelo para a adsorcao
com atraso pode ser utilizado para descrever este fenomeno. Desse modo, neste trabalho e prposta uma tecnica
de estimacao para os parametros do modelo incluindo o atraso. Esta tecnica evita o problema de estimacao naolinear utilizando um algoritmo de estimacao recursivo. A tecnica proposta e avaliada em testes experimentais.
Palavras-chave

.

Introduction

Organic, enzymatic, proteins, whole cells or other
biological materials, immobilized at solid substrates as thin films, are essential components in
the design of assays for biosensors. Typically, such
assays are composed as a stacked layer assembly.
In general, these stacks must arrange in quite specific way, regarding coverage, homogeneity, orientation, robustness and chemical stability. Thiol
based self-assembled mono-layers (SAM) are frequently employed as an initial layer. The connection to a supporting thin gold film relies on
the chemical interaction (Karpovich and Blanchard, 1994 Laborde et al., 2013).
Apart from its various physiological functions
in the cell metabolism, biotin is broadly used as
a reagent for biochemical analysis. In connection with its high affinity and complex formation with Avidin, Streptavidin and Neutravidin, it
also serves as an important linker molecule in the
design of bio-chemical immuno-assays, especially
when utilizing biotinylated antibodies (Laborde
et al., 2013).
Adsorption and apparent formation of mono
molecular biotin and bisbiotin layers onto an evaporated thin gold film onto glass substrates, as
well as to colloidal silver particles and SAM functionalized gold surfaces have been reported previously (Morgan et al., 1992 Liu et al., 2011). The
adsorption kinetics of free biotin onto the plain
gold surface dissolved inwater, as well as its in-

ISSN 2525-8311

teractions with serum remained unknown. This
is considered important, towards achieving a better understanding of non-specific binding mechanisms, especially associated with use of body fluids
that are required in medical diagnostics (Laborde
et al., 2013).
Cell membrane permeation in some cases displays the phenomenon of overshoot (Ohshima
and Kondo, 1989). Also, it was observed oscillatory permeation of drugs into microcapsules
with composite membranes (Ohara et al., 1985).
Oscillation is an important and interesting phenomenon observed in biological and chemical systems (Ohara et al., 1985).
In (Ohshima et al., 1992) were proposed a
model for solute transport through a cell membrane with a time delay in order to explain the
phenomena of overshoot and oscillatory permeation. The importance of the time delay has been
emphasized in various fields, such as biology, ecology and economics.
The time delay was introduced into the intracellular solute concentration based of the fact
that within the cell there is a number of small
particles or sites which are expected to trap or
accumulate diffusing solutes. The introduction of
the time delay leads to, under certain conditions,
overshoot or oscillatory permeation (Ohshima and
Kondo, 1989 Ohshima et al., 1991).
Figure 1 illustrates a sketch of protein Neutravidin (NAv) adsorption steps, in presence of time

1536

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

delayed kinetics 1. Initial Biotin adsorption and
film formation 2.diffusion of NAv molecules to the
Biotin film 3. Irreversible NAv attachment onto
the surface, with NAv Biotin complex formation
4. Simultaneous (irreversible) NAv binding to uncovered fractions on the Gold surface and NAvbinding to excess Biotin 5. Delayed desorption
of these weakly attached NAv-Biotin complexes
over the time period, during which the molecules
may change their shape (conformational change),
undergo chemical surface reactions andor change
position through surface diffusion.

on the solid surface that are capable of adsorbing
solutes. The solute concentrations in the solution
phase and on the solid surface by C (t) and N (t),
respectively. The initial conditions are given by
C (0)  C0 ,

(1)

N (0)  1.

(2)

The differential equations for C (t) and N (t) are
V

dC (t)
 JA,
dt

(3)

A

dN (t)
 +JA,
dt

(4)

with
J  va  vd

(5)

va  ka C (t) Nm  N (t) ,

0, 0  t  
vd 
,
kd N (t   ) , t > 

(6)

and

Figure 1 Sketch of the time delayed adsorption
Due to the time delay existence in the adsorption phenomena, in this work it is proposed an estimation method based on the adsorption kinetics
model parameters including the time delay proposed in (Ohshima et al., 1992). The time delay
is an important parameter because it is direct related with the oscillations observed on the permeation. The proposed method avoids the non linear
estimation problem using a recursive estimation
algorithm. The proposed technique is evaluated
under experimental tests.
This work is organized as follows in Section 2,
the adsorption kinects model is developed in Section 3, the parameter estimation method is formulated in Section 4, the experimental setup used is
described in Section 5, the experimental results
are presented based on two scenarios finally, in
Section 6, the conclusions are made.

where va and vd , respectively, denote the adsorption and the desorption velocities, J the net flux
flowing from the solution phase into the surface,
ka , and kd , the rate constants of adsorption and
desorption, and  the delay time.
Equation (7) states that during the time interval between t  0 and t   , only adsorption
occurs and at the time instant t   , in addition
to adsorption, desorption starts.
As C (t) and N (t) satisfy the conservation relation
C (t) V + N (t) A  C0 V, t  0,

V

dN (t)
dC (t)
 A
, t  0.
dt
dt

ISSN 2525-8311

(9)

Equations (3)-(7) subject to the initial conditions (1) and (2) can be rewritten as

h
i
RC(t)
N (t)
1

C (t) 
C0
Nm i , 0  t  ,
h

N
RC(t)

C0
1  (t) + R N (t ) , t > ,
Nm

K

Nm

(10)

Adsorption Kinetics Model

The accumulation of macro-molecules on a solid
substrate or the air-solution interface may occur.
Attached particles may require a certain time span
for desorption from the interface, as a result of
their conformational changes or other surface processes that affect the residence time. This accounts for a time delay in the temporal evolution
of the solute concentration at the interface, possibly leads to overshoot and oscillation.
Consider adsorption of diffusing solutes onto
a solid surface (area A) from the solution phase
(volume V ). There are Nm sites per unit area

(8)

this implies

C0

2

(7)



N (t)
1
C (t)

1
,
Nm
R
C0

(11)

with

R
K

 ka C 0
Nm A

C0 V
ka

C0
kd

(12)
(13)
(14)

where R is the ratio of the possible maximum
amount of solutes adsorbed on the surface to the
total solute amount and K is the product of the

1537

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

binding constant ( ka kd ) and C0 . Note that R
and K are both nondimensional parameters.
In other to write the Equations (10) and (11)
independently, the following relations were found
and notation changes were made
c (t)



n (t)



n (t)



C (t)
C0
N (t)
Nm
1
1  c (t)
R

3.2
(15)
(16)
(17)

and with respect to the first derivatives
n (t)



c (t)



dn (t)
dt
dc (t)
 Rn (t) .
dt

step algorithm for each value of the time-delay
first, the time-delay  is chosen second, the parameters (, R, K) are estimated using this timedelay value.

(18)
(19)

Substituting Equations (15)-(18) in Equation
(10), it possible to write for c (t) in Equation (20)
and for n (t) in Equation (21).

Regression form

In order to formulate the estimation problem in
the regression form as y(t)  (t), the discretetime model equations were used. As the information available is the solute concentrations on the
solid surface n(t), the discrete-time model of the
Equation (21) using Euler discretization method
is developed and given in Equation (22).
It is necessary to point that it would be possible to use the solute concentrations in the solution
phase c (t) or the solid surface n (t) as the experimental data. There is no limitation.
Assuming that the time-delay  is known,
Equation (22b) can be written as
n(t)  (t )

(24)

where
3
3.1

Parameter Estimation Method

Preliminaries

The estimation problem is a non-linear problem if
all the parameters (, R, K,  ) need to be estimated as can be seen from Equation (10). Nonlinear estimation problems are difficult to solve
especially due to the local minimum solutions.
Also, these problems do not have analytical solutions and are frequently non-convex problems
(Ljung, 1999).
But the non-linear estimation problem can be
turned into a linear estimation problem. This is
true if it is possible to obtain an estimate for the
time delay  separately. So, just , R, K need
to be estimated and the problem can be written
as linear estimation problem and it has a global
minimum.
This way, two kinds of estimation algorithms
can be used to solve the adsortion estimation
problem non-linear algorithms and linear algorithms. The linear algorithms were used in this
work based on the reasons stated above.
In order to obtain an estimate for the time delay  and turn the non-linear problem into a linear problem, it was performed a search procedure.
The chosen value for  is the one that results on
the least quadratic residual error. This residual
error is calculated by the difference of the experimental data y(t) and the estimated data y(t) and
given by
X 1
2
y(t)  y(t ) .
N

2

 (t)





1 n (t) n (t)


n (t   ) (25)

. (26)
(1  h) hR h
K

T





h

The constrained least-square problem is formulated as

subject

1
  min A  B22
 2

(27)

to

(28)

(1) + (2) + (3)  1

where
A 

X

(t )T (t )

(29)

(t )n(t).

(30)

N

B



X
N

So, the proposed estimation algorithm steps
are
1. Set the initial value for  
2. Estimate the parameters (, R, K) using
Equation (24)
3. Calculate the residual error Vi ( ) using Equation (23)
4. Store , R, K,  and Vi ( ) for this iteration
i
5. Go to step 1 until   N 

(23)

6. Search the least absolute value of V(  ) for all
iterations

To performed the search procedure, the estimation algorithm proposed in this work is a two

7. Get the corresponding parameters , R, K
and  .

V ( )  min


ISSN 2525-8311

N

1538

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro


c (t) 

 (R  1) c (t)  c2 (t) ,
 (R  1) c (t)  c2 (t) +


n (t) 

n (t + h) 

4



   (R + 1) n (t) + Rn2 (t) ,
   (R + 1) n (t) + Rn2 (t) 


K c (t

 ) ,

1
K n (t

 ) ,

0  t  ,
t>

(20)

0t
t>

(21)

h + 1  h (R + 1) n (t) + hRn2 (t) ,
0t
h + 1  h n (t) + hRn2 (t)  h
n
(t


)
,
t>
K

(22)

Experimental Setup

A disposable, polymer SPR-biochip has been employed for these investigations, upon appropriate initial surface treatment and functionalization.
Chip fabrication technology and associated optical
set-up, are described in detail elsewhere (Laborde
et al., 2013 Filho et al., 2010). The device is
loaded into a separate optical instrument, denoted
as the SPR reader. It houses all components, as
a microfluidic flow cell for transporting the diluted serum or the analyte solutions to the sensing
chip surface, as well as optical and electronic components for optical monitoring and recording the
temporal variations of the SPR signal that originate from the NSB phenomenon.
The immunoassay under consideration in the
present work utilized NeutrAvidin (NA) mediated
attachment of biotinylated monoclonal antibodies (MABs) against Dengue 2 (DENV2). Briefly,
NeutrAvidin is the deglycosylated form of Avidin
and does not contain carbohydrates. The NeutrAvidin has a lower, nearly neutral isoelectric point
(pI) at pH 6.3 when compared to Avidin (with pI
of 10) and Streptavidin, thus being less prone to
non-specific binding effects, including those from
the serum.
The NA protein forms a tetramer, with four
identical domains for Biotin binding, therewith
acting as a molecular bridge between biotinylated
pathogen specific MABs above, and the substrate
beneath. NeutrAvidin films also can be attached
directly onto the pre-cleaned gold film surface, out
of an admitted diluted NA solution, and without
use of any molecular linker, with the molecular
anchoring mechanism to gold not yet clearly identified. The diluted serum is then admitted to the
functionalized surface.
The surface functionalization and cleaning
protocol, applied in this work, was taken from
(Filho et al., 2010), and is illustrated in the insets
to Figure 2. Briefly, an atomically clean surface
of the 50 nm thin gold layer is an essential precondition for efficient surface functionalization of
the disposable optical SPR-biochip.
The polycrystalline gold film was sputter deposited at ambient temperature under high vacuum conditions. Organic and an-organic surface
contaminations on the surface were initially removed by storage over a period of 3 hrs in hot

ISSN 2525-8311


K

Figure 2 Illustration of the four layers model used
to describe the SPR sensor (1) the gold film,
(2) the semi-infinite substrate, (3) a bio-chemical
sensor element, and (4) a semi-infinite environmental medium, which is usually the analyte solution.
30  hydrogen-peroxide solution. Afterwards, the
surface was rinsed with de-ionized water, nitrogen
dried and again rinsed with 100  ethanol. After chip mounting into the instrument and flow
cell attachment, the sensing surface remains without contact to ambient air, is repeatedly exposed
to concentrated hypo-chloride solution and finally
rinsed with triple distilled water and PBS solution. To attach the linker layer, 1 mM sulfonated
Biotin was dissolved in ethanol (p. A grade) and
the optical chip kept for 3 hr in the solution to
form a self assembled monolayer on the thin gold
film. NeutrAvidin (manufactured by Pierce Inc.),
was admitted as a diluted solution with PBS at
0.01-0.1 mgmL concentration. It is important to
mention that only fresh prepared protein solutions
and materials were used in these investigations.
Aged samples, or those maintained for longer period at ambient temperature consistently lead to
substantially lower coverage values. Pathogen free
human serum and blood samples were provided
from an unknown, healthy donor from a local hospital.
5

Experimental Results

In this section are presented the experimental results using the proposed estimation method to obtain the adsorption kinetics model parameters. In
this work, the parameters are estimated using ex-

1539

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

periment testes where the solute concentration on
the solid surface N (t) was measured.
Optical polymeric SPR-biochips have been
employed in the present work. The sensing spot
is covered with a magnetron sputtered 50 nm
thin, optically semi-transparent gold film. The
chip fabrication technology method details are
described in (Thirstrup et al., 2004). The SPoutput signal provides the adsorption induced
(effective) refractive index variation with time
nef f (t) from which the surface coverage can be
extracted (Laborde et al., 2013).
5.1

Experiment 1

The experiment data (concentration of the NAVcoverage) is shown in Figure 3. This data was pretreated in order to remove the drift and the mean
values. This was done to get unbiased parameters
estimates (Ljung, 1999).

Figure 4 Absolute residual error V ( ) versus the
time-delay
R  37.705 and K  0.075. Folow in Figure 5
the experiment test data and the estimated data
with   222 seconds and with   553 seconds
for comparison. It seems that the physical restriction for the time-delay did not compromised the
model prediction too much.

Figure 3 Experimental data - solute concentration on the solid surface N (t)
As said in the previous Section, it was performed a search procedure in order to keep the
problem linear in the parameters. In this example, the time-delay range was chosen based on the
total experiment test time, that was,   0, 577
seconds.
For each time-delay value in the range, the parameters (, R, K) were estimated and the residual error Vi ( ) were calculated. Follow in Figure
4, the absolute residual error V ( ) versus the
time-delay.
From Figure 4, it is possible to determine the
value for the time-delay that results on the least
absolute residual error. For this case, the timedelay value was   553 seconds and V ( ) 
2.402e9 . But, in this example, the time-delay
value need to be close, not exactly, the oscillations
period due to physical restrictions. Considering
this assumption, the time-delay value is   222
seconds and V ( )  7.107e4 .
With   222 seconds, the estimated parameters using Equation (24) are   0.0005,

ISSN 2525-8311

Figure 5 Experiment test data and estimated
data with   222 seconds and with   553
seconds
From Figure 5, the optimum time delay value
result in good fit result. It almost undistinguished.
Even with physical constraint, the constrained
time delay also have a good fit.
5.2

Experiment 2

The adsorption model under consideration aimed
at describing the kinetics of complex molecules at
the solid-liquid interface. In an attempt to explore
the limitations of the model, the theory has been
tentatively applied to small molecule adsorption
at the solid-gas interface.
Under certain experimental conditions, binding of CO and its oxidation to CO2 on Platinum,
in presence of oxygen, also leads to periodic kinetic
features, which are connected to spatio-temporal
self-organization and a catalytic surface reaction.

1540

XXI Congresso Brasileiro de Automática - CBA2016
UFES, Vitória - ES, 3 a 7 de outubro

Figure 6 exhibits a comparison of the numerically calculated time series with time delay model
using the data from (Ertl, 1995). The constrained
delay (or surface residence) is 84 seconds and close
to the time period of the oscillation. Again, in this
example, the time-delay value need to be close, not
exactly, the oscillations period due to physical restrictions. The model parameters are   0.046,
R  0.089 and K  0.639.

Filho, C. A. S., Lima, A. M. N., Moreira, C. S.,
Thirstrup, C. and Neff, H. (2010). Line shape
analysis and extended instrumental operation of surface plasmon resonance sensors,
Plasmonics 5(3) 259  266.
Karpovich, D. S. and Blanchard, G. J. (1994). Direct measurement of the adsorption kinetics
of alkanethiolate self-assembled monolayers
on a microcrystalline gold surface, Langmuir
10(9) 3315 ? 3322.
Laborde, H., Lima, A., Loureiro, F., Thirstrup,
C. and Neff, H. (2013). Adsorption, kinetics and biochemical interaction of biotin at
the gold?water interface, Thin Solid Films
540 221  226.
Liu, F., Gu, H., Yuan, X., Lin, Y. and Dong,
X. (2011). Chloride ion-dependent surfaceenhanced raman scattering study of biotin on
the silver surface, Journal of Physics Conference Series 277(1) 012025.

Figure 6 Experiment test data and estimated
data with   84 seconds
It is important to mention that the
modelconcept
proprosed
in
(Ohshima
et al., 1992) is suited to replace the non-linear
dynamics system approach and rate equations.
It should be rather considered as a supplement
to gain further information on the adsorption
system. The time delay and associated surface
residence time, respectively, can be understood
as the period available to adsorbed molecules to
diffuse, react or re-organize, before desorbing or
disappearing from the surface.
6

Conclusions

In this work it was proposed an estimation method
for the adsorption kinetics model parameters including the time delay proposed in (Ohshima
et al., 1992). The technique avoids the non-linear
estimation problem using a recursive estimation
algorithm. The time delay selection criteria is
based on the quadratic of the residual error. The
experiment tests shown the capabilities of the proposed method. Apart from kinetic constants, the
model also provides information on the surface
residence time, which is otherwise difficult to determine directly.

Ljung, L. (1999). System Identification (2Nd Ed.)
Theory for the User, Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.
Morgan, H., Taylor, D. and DSilva, C.
(1992). Surface plasmon resonance studies of
chemisorbed biotin-streptavidin multilayers,
Thin Solid Films 209(1) 122  126.
Ohara, Y., Arakawa, M., Kondo, T. and Lee,
K. B. (1985). Preparation of ethylcellulosepolystyrene composite microcapsules of
two-phase structure and permeability of the
microcapsule membranes towards phenobarbital, Journal of Membrane Science 23(1) 1
 9.
Ohshima, H., Fujita, N. and Kondo, T. (1992).
Adsorption kinetics with time delay, Colloid
and Polymer Science 270(7) 707  710.
Ohshima, H., Kamei, M. and Kondo, T. (1991).
Further studies on membrane transport with
time delay, Biophysical Chemistry 41(3) 301
 305.
Ohshima, H. and Kondo, T. (1989). Membrane
transport equations with a time delay, Biophysical Chemistry 33(3) 303  310.
Thirstrup, C., Zong, W., Borre, M., Neff, H., Pedersen, H. and Holzhueter, G. (2004). Diffractive optical coupling element for surface plasmon resonance sensors, Sensor Actuat. BChem. 100 298  308.

References
Ertl, G. (1995). Oscillatory kinetics and spatiotemporal self-organization in reactions at
solid surfaces, Science 254 1750  1755.

ISSN 2525-8311

1541