Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

AGGREGATED INVERTERS WIND FARM HARMONIC PROPAGATION ANALYSIS
CAIO M. PIMENTA1, HEVERTON A. PEREIRA1,2, SILAS Y. LIU1, GABRIEL A. MENDONÇA1, SELÊNIO R. SILVA1
1

Graduate Program in Electrical Engineering - Federal University of Minas Gerais - Av. Antônio Carlos 6627,
31270-901, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
2

Department of Electrical Engineering - Federal University of Viçosa - Av. P. H. Rolfs, sn, Campus
Universitário, 36570-000, Viçosa, MG, Brazil

E-mails pimenta@cpdee.ufmg.br, heverton.pereira@ufv.br, silasyl@gmail.com,
gforti@gmail.com, selenios@dee.ufmg.br
Abstract
 This work evaluates the harmonic propagation in systems with aggregated inverters, for grid integration studies applied to wind-power generation farms. Frequency-domain theoretical analysis and modeling is developed for the variable speed
generation system elements (current-controlled inverters, filters, cables) and their impacts in the overall system resonance is verified. The key points of this work reflect the influence of the control strategy and the aggregation of several units of distributed
generation in frequency response of the system. A real case study with resonance problems is shown and the results are analyzed.
Keywords
 Wind Farm, Harmonic Analysis, Frequency Domain Simulation, Static Inverter Modeling and Control.
Resumo
 Este artigo apresenta uma metodologia para a avaliação de propagação de harmônicos em sistemas com inversores
agregados, focando em estudos de integração nas redes elétricas de sistemas de geração_eólica. É desenvolvido um procedimento
de modelamento dos componentes do sistema no domínio da frequência, incluindo elementos internos da tecnologia de sistemas
de geração a velocidade variável (inversores controlados em corrente, filtros, cabeamento) e seus impactos sobre a ressonância
global do sistema é verificada. Os pontos-chave deste trabalho incluem dois aspectos pouco considerados nestes estudos, a inclusão do efeito do controle e da agregação de unidades de geração na resposta em frequência do sistema. Um estudo de caso real
com problemas de ressonância é mostrado e seus resultados são analisados.
Palavras-chave
 .

1

Introduction

The adoption of non-conventional sources in
electrical power systems is a fact that cannot be neglected in the expansion and operation of national
energetic matrices. In particular, the crescent use of
wind power generation increases the utilization of
static power converters, which are known for injecting harmonic currents in the power grid, thus causing
a change of operational scenery. There is also integration of passive filters in the system, which may
cause resonances, mainly in low short-circuit ratio
cases.
The electrical grid equivalent impedance at the
point of common coupling is a very important aspect
for the performance of the system, due to the fact that
the aggregation of a large number of active generation units with their respective passive filters may
lead to unexpected situations and relevant operational consequences. In many countries, the regulating
agents have changed the grid codes in order to comply with this new scenario and assure the correct
behavior of the electric power systems.
The existence of harmonic currents and voltages
in electric power systems is due to presence of nonlinear loads in the system. The impact of these loads

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

may be evaluated by the frequency dependency of
system impedance 1.
Resonance occurrences in presence of harmonic
current sources require precautions in the electric
system operation. Series resonances may occur, for
instance, due to the interaction between the distribution transformer impedance with the power factor
correction capacitive filter impedance. The existence
of harmonic voltages near this resonant frequency
may lead to high currents in the transformer and in
the capacitor, reducing their life time and causing
possible trips in protection systems.
Parallel resonances may cause elevated voltages
due to the current in the mesh formed by the inductive and capacitive elements. This current may be
low, but it is amplified by the circuit quality factor.
Example of series and parallel resonant circuits are
shown in Figure 1.

5180

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Figure 1. Series and Parallel Resonant Circuits

The interaction between source and loads can be
modeled by Thévenin or Norton equivalents, shown
in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Source-Load Thévenin and Norton Equivalents

Thévenin models are more adequate for evaluating harmonic propagation under a distorted voltage
power grid, while Norton models are adequate for
modeling non-linear loads that inject harmonic currents.
The circuit analysis of these equivalents yields
  








1
 

  
1  


 
1


   



1

1  


(1)

(2)

From (1) and (2) it is possible to observe that the
behavior of the electrical variables depend on 
or





magnitudes in frequency domain 2.




In the context of variable-speed wind-power
generation, we have two dominant electrical system
topologies 3. These are the permanent magnet synISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

chronous generator (PMSG) with full-power back-toback static converter 4 and the doubly-fed induction generator (DFIG) with rotor-side reduced-power
back-to-back converter 5, 6.
These topologies utilize an output high frequency filter, in order to attenuate the harmonic voltage
and current injected by the converters. These filters
may be L 7, LC or LCL 8 filters, for example.
In comparison with traditional power sources,
such as hydraulic or thermal, wind turbines are of
low-power, thus requiring a large number of generators in order to achieve a high-power output for a
generation centre.
The aggregation of many units in parallel, each
with its power inverter and output filter, may lead to
resonance problems 9, 10. The filters need to be
dimensioned in order to achieve low levels of harmonic distortion for each single inverter module and
the aggregated effect needs to be evaluated in the
technical project of the installation.
The objective of this paper is the modeling and
analysis of harmonic propagation in the aggregation
of units in wind farms. This problem is first addressed theoretically and then the analysis is made in
a real case study.
In this work it is analyzed a full back-to-back
converter wind generator insomuch that the methodology can also be applied to photovoltaic (PV) centres and other systems that use aggregated inverters.
This paper is organized as follows. Initially, the
real system in the case study is described in section
2. The single converter system is theoretically analyzed in Section 3, showing the assumptions made
for the modeling and control strategies. Then, in
Section 4, the aggregated system model is derived
from the single inverter system. The case study results are shown in Section 5 and the conclusions are
made in Section 6.
2

Wind Farm System Description

The wind farm considered for the case study is
located in the northeastern region of Brazil and it
consists of a nominal generation power of 42MW,
with 28 generators 11. These generators are connected in three parallel feeders, the first one having
10 ma-chines and the others 9 machines.
All the machines are PMSGs with full-power
back-to-back static converters for grid connection,
thus allowing the wind turbines to operate at variable
speed in order to maximize the energy yield.
Furthermore, each generator has an LCL output
filter in order to attenuate high-frequency voltages
and currents caused by the PWM switching of the
converter. This filter is composed of a series 0.15
inductor and a shunt 500 capacitor. The second
inductive component of the filter is a transformer,
which also raises the voltage of the converter (620V)
to the sub-transmission level (34.5kV).

5181

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

Grid connection is done through a substation
that raises the 34.5kV voltage to 69kV. The single
line diagram of the wind farm, including cabling
specifications and transformer reactances, is shown
in Figure 3.

The wind farm presents harmonic current and
voltage levels over the grid code regulation limits
when there are 19 or more generators connected.
This fact confirms the need of a case study in order
to diagnose the real causes of the problem.

Figure 3. Wind Farm Single-Line Diagram

3

Single Inverter System Modeling and
Control

For simplicity purposes, as usual in balanced
analysis of three-phase systems, the electric system
will be represented by its single-phase equivalent.
At this point, it will be also considered that the
static converters do not produce harmonic currents,
thus modeling them as ideal controlled voltage
sources 12. Later, on Section 4, it will be shown
that it is not difficult to include this current injection
onto the analysis.
The design of the control architecture for the
grid current of the LCL filter used a PR controller in
this case, with an internal proportional gain loop for
the control of the filter capacitor current  . With this
control strategy, it is possible to achieve zero error in
amplitude and phase for the controlled variable, the
grid current  . The controlled model is shown in
Figure 4.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

Figure 4. Single Inverter Single-Phase Model and Control Scheme

The transfer functions of the controllers are expressed by equations (3) and (4) below. In order to
achieve a simple notation, the gain  , which rep-

5182

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

resents the equivalent gain of the system PWM modulator + inverter is made part of the gain  . The
parameter  is the grid frequency.
 !"   

!


  

 !"     !"

(3)

(4)

4

Aggregated System Modeling

Each inverter can be modeled as a current source
in parallel with its output impedance  !". As mentioned on Section 3, this representation also allows
harmonic current injection, if desired.
The cables are modeled with their pi-model
equivalent, shown on Figure 6. Table 1 shows R, L
and C parameters for the cables.

In order to analyze the harmonic propagation,
the system equivalent output impedance is an important factor. This impedance is given by
 !"  ( !" 


*
) " 

(5)

+ -

Figure 6. Cable Pi-Model Equivalent

This expression leads us to
     
  (  .
,
.   

Table 1. Cabling Electrical Parameters (XLPE 2035kV)

(6)

where .  0.  !1 , (  0(  !1 and
  1!2 .
Controller tuning is done analyzing the transfer
function    . The gain  primarily determines
system stability,  is responsible for damping the
LCL filter resonant peak and  is tuned with the
system time response 8.
System response to a sinusoidal step is shown on
Figure 5. Parameters used were   1,   100
and   250.

Size  6

0 7  9 6

1 7  9 6

2 7  9 6

185
95
70

0.130
0.248
0.344

384.62
424.41
445.63

196.10
158.71
143.90

In such manner, each of the three parallel groups
of the wind farm is modeled as shown on Figure 7.

Figure 7. Parallel Generation Group

This system can be easily represented by a <
matrix, where the buses are each inverter output
terminals 12. Including the other groups and the
power grid (represented by its Norton equivalent), it
results in a system as shown in Figure 8.

Figure 5. Single Inverter Sinusoidal Step System Response

Figure 8. Full Wind Farm System Model

The < matrix can be expressed for each harmon
ic order, thus yielding a <
>" matrix. Inverting it
ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

5183

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

leads us to the 
 >" matrix, whose diagonal terms
express the driving point impedance in each bus.
5

Results and Analysis

System simulation is done in three different cases
a.

Only the first generating group (10 inverters) is connected,
b. Both first and second groups are connected (19 inverters total), and
c. All groups are connected (28 inverters total).
As described in Section 2, the harmonic current
and voltage levels are over the limits in cases (b) and
(c) for the real wind farm. This implies that those are
the most critical cases.
The variation of impedance versus frequency in
some buses of the system will be shown. A first result will show the impedance at the point of common
coupling (PCC) and at the first generator of each
group.
The other figures will show the impedance at
three buses of each generating group the first, fifth
and last ones. As the second and third groups are
identical, only one plot is shown.

We can see that the impedance does not vary
much from bus to bus. It is possible to identify several series and parallel resonances in these plots.
Strong series resonance occurs near the 22nd
harmonic and strong parallel resonances occur near
the 9th and 24th harmonics.
5.2 Case (b)  19 inverters
The results are shown in Figure 10.

5.1 Case (a)  10 inverters
The results are shown in Figure 9.

Figure 10. Case (b) Impedance Results

Figure 9. Case (a) Impedance Results

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

In this case, we can see that the impedance seen
by each bus is increased as we go farther away from
the PCC. Once again, several series and parallel
resonances occur.
For the impedance seen from the PCC, strong
series resonance occurs near the 21st, 36th and 38th

5184

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

harmonics and parallel resonances occur near the 23rd
and 37th harmonics.
In the inverter bus, series resonance occurs near
the 22nd and 24th harmonics and parallel resonances
occur near 21st, 23rd and 37th.
The incidence of series resonance of the impedance seen from the PCC near the point where parallel
resonance occurs from the inverter bus is a critical
problem for the system, because we have two phenomena that contribute to increasing harmonic current and voltage levels.
At the same time that any grid voltage distortion
around that harmonic will cause a high harmonic
current level, harmonic current injection by the inverters will also cause high harmonic voltage levels.
5.3 Case (c)  28 inverters

In this case we see similar results to case (b).
Once again the impedance is increased as we go
farther away from the PCC and once again we have
several series and parallel resonances. The critical
problem explained in section 5.2 is also present.
From the PCC, the resonances occur at the same
harmonics as the previous case.
For the inverter buses of the 1st group, series
resonance occurs between the 22nd and 23rd harmonics and parallel resonance occurs near the 21st and
37th harmonics.
Finally, for the bus of the 2nd group, series resonance occurs between the 22nd and 23rd harmonics
and near the 37th harmonic and parallel resonance
occurs near the 21st, 36th and 38th harmonics.
6

Conclusions

The results are shown in Figure 11.
The main results of this study confirm the importance of preliminary studies on the grid integration of a wind farm or other aggregated installations.
These studies should reflect the main features of the
facility and the electric power system in the frequency domain.
In order to analyze the harmonic propagation,
system elements such as inverters, filters, cables and
transformers were modeled in the frequency-domain.
Inverter control topology was also included and
modeled, as it affects the inverter output impedance.
Case study results showed that increasing the
number of aggregated inverters reflects directly in
the impedance seen from each bus of the system,
changing the resonant frequencies of the system.
Future works comprise the use of three-phase
models, the analysis of different generation topologies (such as the DFIG), and the re-tuning of inverter
control in order to attenuate resonances.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the Brazilian
agencies CNPq, FAPEMIG and CAPES.
References
1. IEEE. IEEE Recommended Practice for
Industrial and Commercial Power Systems
Analysis. S.l.. 1998.
2. Cespedes, M. Sun, J. Renewable Energy
Systems Instability Involving Grid-Parallel
Inverters.
Applied
Power
Electronics
Conference and Exposition, 2009. 1971 - 1977.
3. Yazdani, A. Iravani, R. Voltage-Sourced
Converters in Power Systems Modeling,
control, and applications. S.l. WILEY and
IEEE PRESS, 2010.
Figure 11. Case (c) Impedance Results

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

5185

Anais do XIX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática, CBA 2012.

4. Molina, M.G. Sanchez, A.G. Lede, A.M.R. ,
"Dynamic modeling of wind farms with
variable-speed direct-driven PMSG wind
turbines," Transmission and Distribution
Conference and Exposition Latin America
(TD-LA), 2010 IEEEPES , vol., no., pp.816823, 8-10 Nov. 2010.
5. Flores Mendes, V. de Sousa, C.V. Rocha
Silva, S. Cezar Rabelo, B. Hofmann, W. ,
"Modeling and Ride-Through Control of
Doubly Fed Induction Generators During
Symmetrical
Voltage
Sags,"
Energy
Conversion, IEEE Transactions on , vol.26,
no.4, pp.1161-1171, Dec. 2011.
6. Liu, S.Y. Mendes, V.F. Silva, S.R. ,
"Analysis of direct power control strategies
applied to doubly fed induction generator,"
Power Electronics Conference (COBEP), 2011
Brazilian , vol., no., pp.949-954, 11-15 Sept.
2011.
7. Ponnaluri, S., Krishnamurthy, V.,  Kanetkar,
V. (2000). Generalized System Design 
Analysis of PWM based Power Electronic
Converters. Industry Applications Conference,
2000. Conference Record of the 2000 IEEE ,
pp. 1972 - 1979 vol.3.
8. Erika Twining Holmes, D.G. , "Grid current
regulation of a three-phase voltage source
inverter with an LCL input filter," Power
Electronics, IEEE Transactions on , vol.18,
no.3, pp. 888- 895, May 2003.
9. M. C. Benhabib, P. R. Wilczek, J. M. A.
Myrzik, and J. L. Duarte, Harmonic
interactions and resonance problems in large
scale networks, in Proc. Power Syst. Comput.
Conf., Jul. 2008, pp. 18.
10. Enslin, J.H.R. Heskes, P.J.M. , "Harmonic
interaction between a large number of
distributed power inverters and the distribution
network,"
Power
Electronics,
IEEE
Transactions on , vol.19, no.6, pp. 1586- 1593,
Nov. 2004.
11. Mendonça, G. A. Pereira, H. A. Silva, S. R.
Wind farm and system modelling evaluation in
harmonic propagation studies. International
Conference on Renewable Energies and Power
Quality,
(ICREPQ12),
Santiago
de
Compostela, Spain, March 28 to 30, 2012.
12. Fei Wang Duarte, J.L. Hendrix, M.A.M.
Ribeiro, P.F. , "Modeling and Analysis of Grid
Harmonic Distortion Impact of Aggregated DG
Inverters,"
Power
Electronics,
IEEE
Transactions on , vol.26, no.3, pp.786-797,
March 2011.

ISBN 978-85-8001-069-5

5186