XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE APPROACHES IN RELIABILITY MODELING AND ANALYSIS OF REPAIRABLE
SYSTEMS

MARCIA F. P. SALGADO, WALMIR M. CAMINHAS, BENJAMIM R. MENEZES
Computational Intelligence Laboratory, Electrical and Electronic Engineering Departments, PPGEE  UFMG
Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627- Engineering Bld., Lab. 2200, 2 nd floor, Pampulha Cep 31.270-901  Belo Horizonte
 MG, Brazil
E-mails marcia.platilha@cpdee.ufmg.br, caminhas@cpdee.ufmg.br,
brm@cpdee.ufmg.br
Abstract This paper reviews computational intelligence approaches for reliability modeling and analysis of repairable systems. Albeit computational intelligence techniques such as neural networks and fuzzy systems and even stochastic methods have
been employed for solving many different engineering complex problems, when it comes reliability area traditional approaches
are still preferred by industry. Unfortunately with the increasing complexity of systems such techniques might not be able to capture the changes in system features in a precise way what could help to prevent failures and improve system performance. This is
a fairly new research area and the literature available points to the new challenges reliability engineers will have to face and the
new tools they might use for planning and improving system reliability. In this paper basics of computational intelligence techniques will be provided as well as examples on how to apply them on the modeling and analysis repairable systems. It is emphasized that this is a broad subject and this paper does not try to be conclusive by any means.
Keywords computational intelligence, maintainability, reliability, repairable systems.
Resumo O presente artigo revisa abordagens baseadas em inteligência_computacional para a modelagem e análise de sistemas
reparáveis. Embora técnicas de inteligência_computacional tais como redes_neurais artificiais e sistemas_nebulosos, e ainda
modelos estocásticos têm sido empregados para a solução vários problemas complexos de engenharia, no campo da engenharia
de confiabilidade técnicas tradicionais ainda são preferidas na indústria. Infelizmente com o aumento da complexidade de
sistemas, técnicas tradicionais não são capazes de detectar as mudanças nas características dos sistemas de forma precisa, o que
poderia auxiliar na prevenção contra falhas e melhorar a performance dos mesmos. A pesquisa de técnicas de Inteligência
Computacional na área de Engenharia de Confiabilidade é relativamente nova e a literatura disponível sinaliza os desafios
engenheiros de confiabilidade devem enfrentar assim como as técnicas que os mesmos podem utilizar no planejamento e
melhoria da confiabilidade_de_sistemas. No presente artigo conceitos básicos de algumas técnicas de inteligência_computacional
são disponibilizados assim como exemplos de sua aplicação na modelagem e análise de um sistema reparável. Enfatiza-se que o
assunto abordado é amplo e este artigo não tem a intenção de ser conclusivo.
Palavras-chave .

1

addressed. A reason for that is that it is not
uncommon to find many different industries
practicing very poor route cause failure analysis.
Failure modes are very often not clearly identifiable
from the databases what, from a more practical view,
does not provide the information needed to
accurately fit statistical models required for reliability
analyses.
As in other areas of knowledge lacking information
about system operating conditions and failure modes
turns the reliability modeling process really
challenging.
This paper is organized as follows In Section 2
computational intelligence approaches are briefly
reviewed. In order to demonstrate their applicability
to reliability engineering problems, numerical
examples are provided in Section 3. Finally some
conclusions and future work opportunities are
provided in Section 4.

Introduction

In reliability and maintainability engineering
statistical models (parametric or non-parametric
models for non-repairable and repairable systems) are
broadly used as a traditional way of modeling and
analyzing failure and repair data 1-7. The steps to
conduct this kind of analyses are well known by most
people working in reliability field and they were
briefly reviewed in 26.
This paper concerns the modeling of
repairable systems using computational intelligence
approaches. Traditional modeling approaches would
be an alternative if failure and repair data were
always available. This is not a very realistic
assumption and albeit it might be possible to use
parameter estimates from the many handbooks
available the models would not be precise enough to
simulate the system behavior in a more realistic
operating context. Regardless Bayesian approach
might help on some extent to solve this issue and
provide us with better estimates as additional data
becomes available, there would be gaps to be

4496

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

be a concern because the learning process might be
very time-consuming and the network might still not
meet its performance goal. Many specialized
literature dedicates a lot of efforts to design efficient
strategies to adjust networks complexity and
performance using a trade-off process through multiobjective optimization methods.
In general ANN has been applied in areas
such as pattern recognition, signal prediction,
optimization, control and image processing. In
reliability engineering an ANN has been used in
many different ways as part of reliability
optimization process to model objective functions
and constraints, in probability density function and
degradation models approximation.

2 Computational Intelligence Approaches
Review
In the previous section it was stated that most
methodologies are based on the assumption that
failure and repair data are well documented and
available for quantitative modeling using traditional
methods. In this section computational intelligence
paradigms are briefly reviewed followed by
numerical examples of their application to reliability
modeling and analysis of repairable systems.
Computational intelligence techniques emerged
from the studies of natural systems. In the past bioinspired methods were difficult to be implemented
because computational power limitations. Examples
of bio-inspired techniques are Artificial Immune
systems (AIS), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN),
Fuzzy systems (FS), Evolutionary Computing (EC)
and Swarm Intelligence (SI). Such techniques are
also known as Computational Intelligence (CI)
techniques and are part of the so-called Artificial
Intelligence (AI) research area 8. They can be
combined among themselves and with stochastic
methods in order to develop more effective methods
to solve complex engineering problems. In 9 many
different applications of computational intelligence
techniques in reliability engineering might be found
mostly on areas such as the ones summarized in
Figure 1.

2.2 Artificial Immune Systems (AIS)
Recently a new class of algorithms inspired
by immune system principles is being applied in
many different problems such as failure diagnosis,
optimization and pattern recognition 10-11. In
reliability engineering there are still only a few
applications on reliability optimization problems
which can be found in 9, 26.
2.3 Evolutionary computing (EC)
Evolutionary computing techniques are based on
the natural evolution mechanisms in which the core
concept is the survival of the individuals more
adapted to their environment. In the natural evolution
the survival capability is reached through a
reproduction process when new individuals are
generated from their parents and have genes as well
as the best characteristics of all. Individuals with bad
characteristics do not survive and the good ones have
more chances of keeping its characteristics in the
population. In evolutionary computing a population
of individuals are generated and evolved through
many generations in what individuals compete in
order to reproduce themselves. An individual is
generated from the genes of its parents through a
crossover process and it is eventually subjected to a
mutation process. After each generation the best
individuals are chosen to be in the next generation
what it is called elitism. Engelbrecht (2002) cites
the classes of algorithms that are part of what is
named evolutionary computing (1) genetic
algorithms which model the evolutionary process (2)
genetic programming which is based on genetic
algorithms but the individuals are programs
represented in trees (3) evolutionary programming is
the result of the adaptive behavior simulation of the
evolutionary process (4) evolutionary strategies
model the parameters that control the evolutionary
process (5) differential evolution is similar to
genetic algorithms but the reproduction process is
slightly different (6) cultural evolution models the

Figure 1. Computational intelligence applications in reliability
engineering.

2.1 Artificial Neural Networks (ANN)
An artificial neural network (ANN) is a
model with a collection of interconnected nonlinear
processing components named neurons. It can be
used to map a set of inputs into one or more outputs
through connections which can be adjusted by a set
of weights assigned to each connection that are
updated in order to improve the network results, what
is called learning process.
Basically the engineer must select the type,
structure and learning process from a variety of
options depending on the problem in hands. It seems
to be easy but actually depending on the
characteristics of problems being solved this process
can be challenging. From the network structure
perspective its complexity (number of neurons) might

4497

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

own current position and on the position of others.
This algorithm might be applied to function
approximation, clustering, mechanical structures
optimization and for solving system of equations.
ACO is also a global optimization algorithm inspired
by the process ants use to search for the shortest path
to a food source.

evolution of the culture of a population influencing
also the culture of the genetic evolution (7) Coevolution is a evolution process where at the
beginning the individuals are not adapted but might
evolve through a cooperation and competing process
with the other individuals. According to Engelbrecht
(2002), evolutionary computing has been successfully
applied to many real-world problems such as datamining, optimization, clustering, programming and
approximation of time series.
More details regarding the design and
application of evolutionary computing can be found
in Ashlock (2005), Menon (2004) and Jong (1997).
Levitin (2007) presents many examples of
evolutionary computing application to reliability
engineering problems.
In Levitin (2007) the most recent
applications of evolutionary computing in reliability
optimization are presented. A detailed introduction to
system reliability and reliability optimization can be
found in Kuo et al. (2001). An overview of employed
methods for solving many reliability optimization
problems since 1970s is presented by Kuo (2000)
providing a broad bibliographic review on the
subject.

3 Repairable System Modeling and Analysis
using Computational intelligence Techniques
As mentioned before traditional approaches
following the basic idea on collecting data and fitting
distributions are still preferred by most of reliability
practitioners. From the statistical point of view even
when field data is not available there are other ways
of gathering data to perform reliability analysis based
on handbook data and expert opinions which is
known as elicitation process 26-30.
For this paper, two different experiments were
developed for a Turbine-Compressor system
described in 31. The first experiment is an
application of Bayesian method. The basic idea of
this method is to use prior information such as
handbook data (objective) and expert opinion
(subjective) to estimate the parameters of failure and
repair distributions. Once the prior information is
available, the Bayes Theorem can be applied in order
to update the parameters according to any additional
sample data that might be available 3.

2.4 Fuzzy systems (FS)
Fuzzy systems are based on fuzzy logic
theory and the main idea behind the use of fuzzy
logic is to model human thinking through linguistic
variables and the intrinsic rules by which they are
related. This is a powerful technique and have been
used on many different applications and the reason is
that in real-world applications (e.g. reliability
modeling) quantitative information might not be
available but it might be gathered through an
elicitation process 27-29. Many times experts are
not able to express their knowledge numerically (e.g.
failure rates, maintenance rates, costs, etc.) and then
we need to find a way to turn qualitative knowledge
into a mathematical model. In reliability engineering
this problem of not having enough data to build
models is a limitation to the use of traditional
techniques, and in reality this is a very common
problem in most industries.

3.1 Application of Bayesian Method
Based on prior data for the components in the
Turbine-Compressor system, the system reliability
function was estimated and its parameters were
roughly approximated to   1.33 and   77.51
through a regression analysis. Unfortunetely only a
few records were available causing a very broad
confidence interval for the reliability function
considering the estimated and  parameters. Lets
say that some additional maintenance data are made
available and we need to estimate the new parameters
of the system reliability function based on these new
data. The procedure to perform this kind of analysis
is based on the assumption that the prior parameters
follow some kind of probability distribution as a way
of representing the uncertainty due to lack of
knowledge about the true values of the parameters
since only handbook data was initially available.
Once this assumption is made the next step is to
sample from this distribution in order to obtain the
prior distribution of the parameters. Lets say the
parameter  follows a normal distribution with mean
 and standard deviation ,  The
parameters and are then elicited from experts.
There are different ways of doing that. For example,
in 31 is assumed to be between 0.9 and 2.7 for
turbine blades depending on the failure modes, and

2.5 Swarm Intelligence (SI)
Swarm Intelligence is a concept fairly new
originated from the study of colonies or populations
of social individuals. As a result different efficient
optimization and clustering methods have been
designed 15. Particle Swarm (PSO) and Ant Colony
(ACO) algorithms are used for solving optimization
problems. PSO is a global optimization approach
inspired by social behavior of birds. Each individual
in the population is called particle, and many
particles together are called particle swarm. Each
particle has its position adjusted depending on its

4498

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

between 1.2 and 6.6 for compressor blades depending
also on the failure modes. Those assumptions are
based on experience and historical data observed for
that particular piece of equipment. Usually those
intervals will have to be elicited in a different way
rather than asking experts about  and  mean and
deviation values since they will eventually not be
familiar with statistical terminology. Although this
procedure seems to be quite straightforward some
attention for the elicitation process needs to be given
in order to make sure the elicited numbers are
accurate and not biased. More details on eliciting
process can be found in 26.

For this paper a Neuro-fuzzy system was trained
aiming to estimate the Compressor reliability based
on the states of its components. Let say that no
component failure has been observed but based on
maintenance inspections it has been observed a
certain level of components degradation. Assuming
that there are three different conditions for each
component (low, medium and high degradation) and
that these degradation levels can be represented by
the changes in the  parameters of each component,
then now we can model the reliability of the
components as fuzzy probabilities with three
membership functions.
Different levels of components degradation and
associated reliability values were artificially
generated and fuzzy membership functions were set
for each of them. Also, the compressor reliability was
estimated from these different components reliability
levels. The membership functions were used as inputs
and the associated compressor reliability levels were
used as the target for training a neuro-fuzzy system.
The results are showed in Figure 3.

(a)

Figure 2 Top  Untrained neuro-fuzzy system and target
system reliability given the fuzzy reliability of system
components. Bottom  Trained neuro-fuzzy system output
compared to target system reliability.

(b)
Figure 1 (a) Likelihood, prior and posterior of 
parameter (b) Prior and posterior Weibull reliability
function.

4 Conclusions
3.2 Application of Neuro-Fuzzy System

In this paper computational intelligence
techniques were reviewed and their applicability to
repairable systems modeling and analysis were
demonstrated through numerical examples.

In the last section an example of Bayesian
approach was provided. As it could be noticed, the
main assumption is that the reliability analyst is able
to elicit prior knowledge in order to approximate a
prior distribution for the parameters of the reliability
function of a particular system of interest. That will
be in fact a very robust method if in real world data
was available in order to update this prior
information what is clearly not a very realistic
assumption.
An alternative method based on computational
intelligence techniques might be useful in order to
incorporate expert knowledge in an adaptive manner.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial
support of the CNPq and FAPEMIG.
References
1.
2.

4499

A. Birolini (2004). Reliability Engineering
Theory and Practice, 4 edn, Springer-Verlag.
D. Kececioglu (2002). Reliability Engineering
Handbook, Vol. 1-2, DEStech publications.

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

W. Meeker and L. Escobar (1998). Statistical
Methods for Reliability Data, John Wiley.
P. OConnor (2002). Practical Reliability
Engineering, 4th edn, John Wiley.
H. Ascher and H. Feingold (1984). Repairable
Systems - Modeling, inference, misconceptions
and their causes, Marcel Dekker.
S. E. Rigdon and A. P. Basu (2000). Statistical
Methods for the Reliability of Repairable
Systems. John Wiley. 224pp.
C. Richard Cassidy (2007). Introduction to
Repairable Systems Modeling. Tutorial Notes.
In Proceedings of Annual Reliability and
Maintainability Symposium. Orlando, Florida,
United States.
A. P. Engelbrecht (2003). Computational
Intelligence An Introduction. Wiley. 310 pp.
G. Levitin, (2007). Computational Intelligence in
Reliability
Engineering
Evolutionary
Techniques in Reliability Analysis and
Optimization and New Meta-heuristics, Neural
and Fuzzy Techniques in Reliability, Vol. 39-40,
Springer-Verlag.
L. N. de Castro and F. J. V. Zuben
(2002).Learning and optimization using the
clonal selection principle, IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, N.3 6 239-251.
S. M. Garrett (2005). How Do We Evaluate
Artificial Immune Systems? Evolutionary
Computation. Vol.13 N. 2, 145-177, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
D. Ashlock, (2005). Evolutionary Computation
for Modeling and Optimization, Springer Verlag.
K. D. Jong (1997). The handbook of
Evolutionary Computation, IOP Publishing Ltd
and Oxford University Press.
A. Menon (2004). Frontiers of Evolutionary
Computation, Kluweer Academics Publishers.
J. Kennedy and R. C. Eberhart (2001). Swarm
Intelligence, Morgan Kauffman.
V. Palade, C. D. Bocaniala and L. Jain (2006).
Computational Intelligence in Fault Diagnosis,
Springer-Verlag.
W. Pedrycz, F. Gomide (2007) Fuzzy Systems
Engineering
Toward
Human-Centric
Computing. Wiley-IEEE Press, 526pp.
T.-C. Chen (2006). IAs based approach for
reliability redundancy allocation problems,
Elsevier Applied Mathematics and Computation
182 1556-1567.
M. Gen and Yun, Y. (2006). Computational
intelligence approach for reliability optimization
State-of-the-art survey, Reliability Engineering
and System Safety 91 1008-1026.
W. Kuo and V. R. Prasad (2000). An annotated
overview of system-reliability optimization.
IEEE Transactions on Reliability N.2 49 176187.
W. Kuo, V. R. Prasad, F. A. Tillman and C.L.
Hwang (2001). Optimal Reliability Design

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Fundamentals and Applications, 1 edn,
Cambridge University Press.
M. F. P. Salgado, A. C. Lisboa, R. R. Saldanha,
W. M. Caminhas, B. R. Menezes (2007).
Application of evolutionary computing in system
reliability optimization. In Proceedings of I
Computational
Intelligence
Brazilian
Symposium of Neural Network Brazilian Society
(SBRN). UFSC, V.1 1-7. (In Portuguese).
M. F. P. Salgado, A. C. Lisboa, R. R. Saldanha,
W. M. Caminhas, B. R. Menezes (2008).
Application of evolutionary computing in system
reliability optimization. Learning and Nonlinear
Models  Brazilian Society of Neural Network
Magazine. Accepted in October, 2008. (In
Portuguese).
M. F. P. Salgado (2008). Application of
Optimization
Techniques
on
Reliability
Engineering. Master Thesis - Electrical
Engineering Post-graduation Program of Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Brazil. (In
Portuguese).
M.F.P.
Salgado
(2009).
Computational
Intelligence in Reliability and Maintainability
Engineering. In Proceedings of Annual
Reliability and Maintainability Symposium. Fort
Worth, Texas, United States.
A. OHagan, C. E. Buck, A. Daneshkha, J. R.
Eiser, P. H. Garthwaite, D. J. Jenkinson, J. E.
Oakley, and T. Rakow (2006). Uncertain
Judgements Eliciting Experts Probabilities.
John Wiley.
S. Sandri, D. Dubois, H. Kalfsbeek (1990).
Elicitation, assessment and pooling of expert
judgments using possibility theory.
D. Dubois and H. Kalfsbeek (1990). Elicitation,
assessment and pooling of expert judgment using
possibility theory. In Proc. of the 8th Inter.
Congress of Cybernetics and Systems (C.N.
Manikopoulos, ed.).
S. Sandri, D. Dubois and H. Kalfsbeek (1990).
Elicitation, assessment and pooling of expert
judgments using possibility theory.
D. Dubois, H. Prade and S. Sandri (1993). Fuzzy
Logic State of the Art (R. Lowen, M. Roubens,
eds.),
chapter
On
possibilityprobability
transformations, pages 103-112. Kluwer
Academic.
H. P. Barringer, M. Kotlyar (1996). Reliability
Of Critical TurboCompressor Equipment. Fifth
International Conference on Process Plant
Reliability, Gulf Publishing Company and
HYDROCARBONS PROCESS Magazine,
October 2-4, Houston, TX, United States.
D. Pandey, S. K. Tyagi, V. Kumar (2009).
Failure mode screening using fuzzy set theory.
Int. Math. Forum, Vol. 4, no. 13-16, 779-794.

33. M. F. P. Salgado (2010). Soft Computing
Approaches in Reliability Modeling And
Analysis of Repairable Systems. In Proceedings
4500

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

of Annual Reliability and Maintainability
Symposium (RAMS). San Jose, California,
United States.

4501