Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

SCREW-BASED MODELING OF A HUMANOID BIPED ROBOT
G USTAVO S. T OSCANO, H ENRIQUE S IMAS, E UGÊNIO B. C ASTELAN
 Universidade

Federal de Santa Catarina, Centro Tecnológico, Departamento de Automação e Sistemas, CEP
88040-900, P.O. Box 476, Florianópolis, SC, Brasil.

 Universidade

Federal de Santa Catarina, Centro Tecnológico, Departamento de Engenharia Mecânica, CEP
88040-900, P.O. Box 476, Florianópolis, SC, Brasil.

Emails gustavo.toscano@posgrad.ufsc.br, henrique.simas@ufsc.br, eugenio.castelan@ufsc.br
Abstract This paper presents the kinematic modelling of spatial humanoid robots (HRs) using the concept of Floating Base
through the Screw Theory, and its tools Assurs virtual chains and Daviess Method. The proposed approach uses the virtual chains
to represent the mechanism of an HR as a spatial and parallel mechanism composed by four loops, which is complex because of
its degree of freedom. Associating Daviess Method and the virtual chains, the differential kinematic model of the spatial HR was
performed. The velocities of the virtual joints were obtained using the Jacobian matrix of each virtual chain, and its linear and
angular displacements were obtained through numerical methods. The velocities of the real joints were computed by means of the
Daviess Method, which can solve the inverse differential kinematics of parallel mechanisms regardless its topology or its degree
of freedom. The use of the Screw Theory made it possible to obtain a kinematic representation of the HR which is independent
from any fixed reference frame. The proposed approach was applied to a specific HR (Bioloid, from Robotis). The related results
are presented graphically from computer simulations.
Keywords

Kinematic Model, Humanoid Robots, Screw Theory, Daviess Method.

Resumo Este artigo apresenta a modelagem cinemática_de_robôs_humanoides (RHs) espaciais utilizando o conceito de Base
Flutuante, a Teoria de Helicoides e suas ferramentas cadeias virtuais de Assur e o Método de Davies. A abordagem proposta
utiliza as cadeias virtuais para representar um RH como um mecanismo paralelo, espacial e composto por quatro circuitos, o qual
é complexo devido aos graus de liberdade que o compõe. Com o uso das cadeias virtuais e do Método de Davies, o modelo
cinemático de um HR foi obtido. As velocidades das juntas virtuais foram determinadas pela matriz Jacobiana de cada cadeia
virtual individualmente os deslocamentos lineares e angulares das juntas virtuais foram determinados por métodos_numéricos. As
velocidades das juntas reais foram obtidas por meio do Método de Davies, o qual é capaz de resolver a cinemática diferencial inversa de mecanismos paralelos independentemente de suas topologias e de seus graus de liberdade. O uso da Teoria de Helicoides
para modelagem diferencial cinemática_de_robôs possibilita a obtenção de um modelo independente de coordenadas de referência. O método proposto foi aplicado a um RH específico (Bioloid, da Robotis). Os resultados deste trabalho são apresentados
graficamente a partir de simulações computacionais.
Palavras-chave

.

which they show their approach would be a novel parallel robot for rotationary humanoid wrist. Sánchez
et al. (2011) used the ST to solve the inverse kinematics of the AH1N1 HR (Sánchez et al., 2011). In spite
of solving the inverse kinematics using ST, the authors
solved the direct kinematics by the DH convention and
nothing was said about the differential kinematics of
the humanoid.

1 INTRODUCTION
There are two methods commonly used to model
the kinematics of robots a first one based on the
Denavit-Hartenberg (DH) convention (Denavit, 1955)
and the other one based on Screw Theory (ST) (Hunt,
2000 Davidson and Hunt, 2004). While the DH
method is largely used in literature, the ST approach
is less known.
Rocha et al. (2011) pointed out some advantages
of the ST over the DH convention. The flexibility
of reference choices in the successive screw displacements method is a remarkable feature, and by a good
choice of parameters, simplified model equations can
be generated. Screw-based modeling presents its main
advantages in differential kinematic models, in which
the respective Jacobian is formed by the normalized
screws of the kinematic chain (Rocha et al., 2011).
It is not common to find works on screw-based
modeling of humanoid robots (HRs) in the literature
despite some interesting works that use the ST to
approach some humanoid characteristics. Gal et al.
(2004) applied ST to analyse the human mandibular
mechanics. In (Sabater et al., 2006), the ST was used
to design and analyse a spherical humanoid neck. Zhu
et al. (2009) used ST to model the kinematics of a
Stewards platform and made an analogy by means of

In the works of Moro et al. (2011) and Moro et al.
(2012), the biped robots are modeled using the DH
parameters and, thus, a gait, for example, would be
performed by switching between two models depending on which foot is supporting the robot (Toscano
et al., 2011).
Man et al. (2007) presented a kinematic analysis
of a humanoid structure by the ST. Although the authors show how to use the ST for solving the direct
and inverse kinematics of an HR, and indicate the use
of the screw-based Jacobian to solve its differential
kinematics, their work lacks clarity how use the ST
for RHs modeling.
Therefore, this work aims to present how a full
body HR can be modeled using ST and its tools in a
systematic and clearer way. For that, the virtual chains
(Santos et al., 2006) are used to represent the HR as a
closed mechanism, and it is shown how to apply the

944

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Daviess Method (Campos et al., 2005 Santos et al.,
2006) to HRs.
This paper is organized as follows. First, the ST
and its tools are briefly presented. Then, it is shown
how to model the kinematics of an HR using virtual
chains and the Daviess Method. After that, the simulation results are shown. Finally, the conclusions of
this work are presented.

general displacement of a rigid body - Eq. (1) - can be
represented by a homogeneous transformation given
by
p2  A (,t) p1 ,
(2)
in which A (,t) is the homogeneous transformation
4  4 matrix (see (Tsai, 1999) for more details).
2.1.1 Successive Screw Displacements
A kinematic chain is composed by rotational and
prismatic joints numbered from 1 to n. Each joint describes the displacement between two successive links
starting from the base frame, defined as the Link 0,
until the last link of the kinematic chain, defined as
Link n. Thus, the joint i describes the relative displacement between the links i and i  1.
The position and the orientation of a point on a
Link k with respect to a Link c of the same considered
chain can be given by (Simas, 2008)
!

2 SCREW-BASED KINEMATIC TOOLS
In order to simplify the comprehension and the
development of the HB model, some fundamentals are
briefly presented in this section.
2.1 Successive Screw Displacement Method
Charles theorem states that the general spatial
displacement of a rigid body is a rotation about an axis
and a translation along the same axis such combination of translation and rotation is called a screw displacement (Bottema and Roth, 1979).

Ack  Acr

k



ic+1

Arqi

Ark ,

(3)

where r indicates the link in which a coordinate system is fixed Ack is the homogeneous matrix that describes the position and orientation of a point on the
Link k with respect to a coordinate system attached to
the Link c Acr is the homogeneous matrix defined in
the initial position of the chain that describes the position and orientation of the reference coordinate system
attached to Link r with respect to the coordinate system on Link c Ark is the homogeneous matrix also defined in the initial position of the chain that describes
the position and orientation of the coordinate system
of a point on Link k with respect to the reference on
Link r and Arqi is the homogeneous matrix that describes the relative displacement between the links i and
i  1 described by the screws defined with respect to
the reference coordinate system attached on Link r.

Figure 1 Vector diagram of a spatial displacement.
In Fig. 1, it can be seen a point P of a rigid body
displaced from the first position P1 to the second position P2 by a rotation of , about a screw axis, followed
by a translation of t along the same axis. The rotation
brings P from P1 to Pr2 , and the translation brings P

T
from Pr2 to P2 . In Fig. 1, s  sx sy sz denotes a
unit vector along the direction of the screw axis, and

T
s0  s0x s0y s0z denotes the position vector of a
point lying on the screw axis, both relative to the same
reference frame.
Representing the first position P1 as the vector

T
p1  p1x p1y p1z and the second one by p2 

T
p2x p2y p2z , the general screw displacement for
a rigid body can be given by the Rodriguess formula
as
p2  R () p1 + d (t) ,
(1)

2.2 Screw Representation of Differential Kinematics
The complete displacement of a rigid body by
means of a rotation and a translation with respect to
the same axis is called screw movement (or twist) and
is denoted by . The ratio of the linear and angular velocities -  and , respectively, and the the latter being
relative to the considered reference frame - is called
kk
pitch of the screw and denoted by h  kk
.
The twist  is composed by a pair of vectors as

T
  T vp T , in which vp represents the linear
velocity of a point P attached to the body, which is
instantaneously coincident with the origin O of the reference frame (Tsai, 1999). The twist  is completely
defined by the vectors s and s0 and the scalar pitch, and
the twist can be decomposed into its normalized screw
 and its magnitude q as (Davidson and Hunt, 2004)
  


s


q  q.
(4)
vp
s0  s + hs

where R () is the rotation matrix corresponding to the
rotation  about the screw axis and d (t) is the displacement vector corresponding to the translation of t
along the screw axis.
Considering
the
augmented
vectors
 T
T
 T
T
1
1 , the
and P2 as p2  p2
p1  p1

945

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

In a kinematic chain, the relative velocity between
any two links is obtained by the sum of the twists of
the joints between them (Rocha et al., 2011). The
sum is possible only if all twists are defined according to the same referential frame. The twist can be
expressed according to any reference by means of the
screw transformation Tij  66 (Eq.(5)), in which b
pij
is the skew-symmetric matrix composed by the elements of the position vector pij , and Rij expresses the
orientation of the frame j with respect to the frame i
(see (Tsai, 1999) for more details).
 i

R
0
Tij  i j i
(5)
b
pj Rj Rij

3

KINEMATIC MODELING OF AN
HUMANOID ROBOT USING SCREW
THEORY

In the previous section, it was briefly presented
the basis of ST and its tools that will be used in the
current section to model the HR Bioloid, from Robotis.
3.1 Bioloid Humanoid Robot
Bioloid is an HR composed by one floating base
(FB) (see Papadopoulos and Dubowsky (1991), Sentis
(2007) and Mistry et al. (2008) for more details) link
and four serial chains that mimic the four limbs of the
human body. It weights 1, 7 Kg and is 0, 397 m in
tall, and its structure is composed of eighteen actuated
joints three degree of freedom (DoF) in each arm and
six DoF in each leg.
A 3D CAD model of an humanoid structure is depicted in Fig. 2. The waist is the local reference on the
humanoid kinematic chain, that is, the position of the
arms and the legs are given with respect to it.

2.3 Davies Method
Daviess Method is a systematic manner to solve
the differential kinematics of closed chain mechanisms. Davies (1981) derived his method from
the Kirchhoffs circulation law for electrical circuits.
Considering a closed chain mechanism composed by
n joints and in which velocity of one of its links with
respect to itself is null (Campos et al., 2005 Santos
et al., 2006), then, the circulation law may be expressed as
n

 i qi  0,

(6)

i1

in which i is the normalized twist, qi is the magnitude
of i and 0 is a null vector whose dimension is equal
to the i . Equation (6) is the constraint equation and it
can be generalized as
Nq  0,
(7)


where N  1 2 . . . n is the network matrix
containing the normalized screws whose signals depend on the screw definition in the circulation law ori
T
entation, and q  q1 q2 . . . qn is the magnitude vector.
In a closed kinematic chain, primary and secundary joints have to be defined to handle passive
and actuated joints, respectively. Using the constraint equation Eq. (7), the secondary joint velocities
can be calculated as function of the primary joint velocities (Davies, 1981 Campos et al., 2005 Santos
et al., 2006). To this end, the same equation earlier
cited is rearranged in a manner to highlight the primary and secondary joint velocities as
 

 qs
Ns Np
 0,
(8)
qp

Figure 2 3D Model of an humanoid structure.
The mass and length of the links of the humanoid structure and the position of the shoulders
and the thigh, with respect to the waist can be found
in Toscano et al. (2011). For the sake of simplicity, the position of the center of mass of each link
is right in the middle of itself. However, the position of the center of mass of the trunk of the robot,
with respect to its waist, is given by the position vec
T
tor pw
TCM  0, 014563 0 0, 086397 .
3.2 Modeling of The Bioloid Robot Using Screw
Theory
In this section, the kinematic modeling of the Bioloid robot by the ST and its tools will be presented.
Because of the bilateral symmetry of the HR structure
and because the kinematic modeling is a systematic
method, just the modeling of one leg will be addressed
here to design the models of the three other limbs, the
procedure just has to be repeated with the parameters
of each limb.

where Np and Ns are the primary and secondary network matrices, respectively, and qp and qs are the corresponding primary and secondary magnitude vectors,
respectively. Thus, if the Ns network matrix is square
and invertible, the secondary joint velocities may be
determined as
qs  N1
s Np qp .

3.2.1 Screw-based Modeling of One Leg
The topology of a kinematic chain that represents
a humanoid leg can be of different types, depending on

(9)

946

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

of Eq. (3). Allocating the reference frame (called re f )
in the middle of link LL2 (Fig. 3b), the vectors s0Li are
determined with the new reference as


0
,
0
s0L1  s0L2  s0L3  
(11)
LL2
LL1 + 2
 
0
(12)
s0L4   0 

the kind of movements that is expected from the chain.
In the case of this paper, the chain of the considered leg
has six actuated joints and three links. The distribution
of the joints in the kinematic chain and its links can be
seen in Fig. 3.

LL2
2

and
s0L5  s0L6

tification of the screw parameters (b) three reference frames
allocated in the leg.

Once the screw parameters are identified in
Fig. 3a, the screw of each joint can be determined like
Eq. (4)
(10)
Li  Li qLi ,
in which Li is the joint i of the leg and qLi is the magnitude of the angular velocity of the joint i. The Jacobian
matrix of the kinematic chain representing one leg, illustrated by Fig. 3, is


JL  L1 L2 L3 L4 L5 L6 .

The matrices Aref
qLi are the matrices formed by the
screw of each joint of the leg in respect to the frame
re f (Fig. 3) using Rodriguess formula as in Tsai
(1999).

As JL is a square matrix, it can be inverted to compute
the inverse differential kinematic of this chain.
Direct Kinematics of One Leg

3.2.2 Differential Kinematics of the Whole Humanoid Body

The position and orientation of an end-effector
in a serial kinematic chain can be determined using
Eq. (3). In Fig. 3b, it was assumed that the thigh, calf
and foot links are labeled as LL1 , LL2 and LL3 , respectively. The base frame (frame 0) is allocated in the
intersection point among the screw axis of the joints
q1 , q2 and q3 . The end-effector frame, called here as
f oot frame, is allocated in a point collinear to the link
LL3 on the sole of the foot.

On the earlier sections, it was demonstrated how
the ST can be used to model the kinematics of a chain
that represents a humanoid leg. After modeling the
three other limbs, it is necessary to represent all four
chains at the same reference frame in the humanoid
structure to have a full-body kinematic model of a HR.
The waist is the local reference frame to the humanoid structure and, thus, the reference frame to the
chains of the humanoid limbs. As the limbs were modeled individually and with respect to the inertial reference frame, a transformation had to be applied to represent, for example, the right leg with respect to the
waist of the humanoid. The transformation needed is
made by the Eq. (5) as illustrated in Fig. 5.
The matrix Tw
RL "transforms" a generic leg
(Fig. 3) into the right leg of the humanoid and it is
composed of the skew-symmetric matrix pw
RL and the
rotation matrix Rw
(Eq.
(5)).
The
same
can
be done
RL
would
"transto the right arm, that is, the matrix Tw
RS
form" a generic arm into the right arm of the robot
and it would be composed of the skew-symmetric maw
trix pw
RS and the rotation matrix RRS . Because of the

Table 1 Screw parameters of the leg shown in Fig. 3a.

1
2
3
4
5
6

s

0

1

0

0

0

1

0
0
1
1
1
0

s0
T
1
T
0
T
0
T
0
T
0
T
0


s0
 L1x
s0
 L2x
s0
 L3x
s0
 L4x
s0
 L5x
s0L6x

s0L1y
s0L2y
s0L3y
s0L3y
s0L5y
s0L6y

qi
T
s0L1z
T
s0L2z
T
s0L3z
T
s0L4z
T
s0L5z
T
s0L6z

(13)

r
The A0ref  Acr and Aref
foot  Ak are, respectively,
the position and orientation of the frame re f with respect to the base frame, and the position and orientation
of the frame f oot with respect to the frame re f 


1 0 0
0
0 1 0


 0

A0ref  
(14)
LL2  
0 0 1  LL1 + 2 
1
0 0 0


1 0 0
0

0 1 0


 0
(15)
Aref
.
foot  0 0 1  LL2 + L

L3 
2
0 0 0
1

Figure 3 Kinematic chain that represents one leg (a) iden-

Joint


0
  0 .
 L2L2


qL1
qL2
qL3
qL4
qL5
qL6

It is necessary to allocate another reference frame
that will be used to determine the matrix Acr and Ark

947

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

1

2

3

4

Figure 4 Directed graph (digraph) representation of the parallel mechanism composed by the humanoids and the virtual
chains, with the designation of the number of circuits, and its directions. ijk and vijk are the twists of the real and virtual
joints of each limb i  R, L for right and left side j  L, A for leg and arm and k  1, . . . , 6. FBk are the floating base
twists

.
tial reference frame and the humanoids waist, and the
others four, for each limb, would be with respect to the
waist of the robot.
Though, by the use of the virtual chains, an HR
structure can be represented as a closed mechanism
and, then, the Daviess Method can be applied, by the
ST, to solve its differential kinematics. With the use of
the virtual chains, the motion planning can be done in
the inertial reference frame as planning motion to five
collaborative robots.
The Bioloid robot has just three joints in each
arm. However, in order that all matrices have appropriate sizes to the Daviess Method, three more joints
were added to each arm to solve the differential kinematics of the HB Bioloid that is why the number of
"real" joints between Figures 2 and 4 are different.
As the motion is spatial, five 3P3R virtual chains
are used one to be the FB in the biped waist and the
other four are linked, each one, to the feet and to the
hands. The resulting mechanism is a complex spatial parallel mechanism with four loops composed of
fifty four joints and fifty one links, as it can be seen in
Fig. 4 presented by the directed graph (digraph) notation (Campos et al., 2005 Tsai, 2001).
Now, with the HR represented as a closed mechanism, it is possible to apply the Daviess Method to
solve the differential kinematics for the whole body at
once. First, the network matrix N has to be assembled
with the normalized screws. As the mechanism has
fifty four joints and four loops, therefore, the matrix
N has dimension 24  54, and the magnitude vector
has dimension 24  1 (see Appendix A for more information about the magnitude vector q and the network
matrix N).
As the method states, it is necessary to identify and distinguish the primary and the secondary
joint variables in the magnitude vector. As this work
uses the virtual chains to impose motion to the "real"

Figure 5 Reference frame transformation (a) transformation to the right leg (b) transformation to the right arm.

bilateral symmetry of the human body, the determination of the left leg and left arm chains were done in
a similar way as it was done to the right ones. That
is, the transformation Tw
LL would make a generic leg
(Fig. 3) be the left leg and, likewise, the transformation Tw
LS would make a generic arm be the left arm.
w
w
w
The matrices Rw
RL , RRS , RLL and RLS are 3  3
identity matrices since there is no change among the
orientations of the frames (Fig. 5). However, the vecw
w
w
tors pw
RL , pRS , pLL and pRS , that compose the skewsymmetric matrices, are determined by the data found
in Toscano et al. (2011) (see Tsai (1999) for more details).
By placing the four limbs with respect to the humanoid waist in the robot structure, the whole HR
body is formed as it can been seen in Fig. 2. It is composed of one FB allocated in its waist (that is, an 3P3R
virtual kinematic chain attached between the inertial
reference frame and the waist frame) and four serial
kinematic chains that work together to perform a task,
for example, making a gait or manipulating an object.
Using the DH parameters to solve differential
kinematics of the HR, there would be five Jacobian
matrices to be considered the first between the iner-

948

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

chains, then, the joints of the virtual chains were chosen to be the primary velocities. That means,

q  qTs

qTp

T

,

(16)

in which qs is formed by the first twenty four lines
of the vector q ("real" joint velocities) and qp is assembled by the last thirty lines (virtual joint velocities). Choosing Np and Ns coherently with qs and qp ,
respectively, the Daviess Method can be applied as
it states in Eq. (7) and differential kinematics of the
whole body was solved.

4

Figure 7 Angular displacements, in rad, of the joints of

RESULTS

the legs.

To validate the screw-based model of the HR, a
gait was elaborated and performed by computer simulation. In Fig. 6, it can be seen the humanoid in
four different video frames during the simulation of
the gait beginningending of a gait cycle.
Using the FB, it was possible to model the kinematics of an HR detached from any fixed reference
frame. By the use of the virtual chains, the gait was
elaborated as generating trajectories for five different
manipulator robots, and the trajectories were all generated in the inertial reference frame.

Figure 8 Angular velocities, in rads, of the joints of the
legs.

5

CONCLUSION

This paper presented in a systematic way how to
use the Floating Base concept, the Screw Theory and
its tools to model a full-body humanoid robot. With
the Floating Base concept, the HR could be modeled
in such a way that it has only one kinematic model independently of the supporting leg. Moreover, by the
use of the virtual chains, it was possible to represent a
humanoid structure as a closed mechanism and, then,
apply the Daviess Method to solve the inverse differential kinematics of the whole humanoid body at once
without any consideration about the topology of the
robot.
By this method, to generate a trajectory for humanoid robots is almost like to generate trajectories
for a multi-robot system, since the virtual chains can
be understood as five different serial robots working
together to perform a task. This approach allows to use
various methods and tools of the collaborative robotics
in humanoid robots. The trajectory generated was
evaluated by the ZMP criterion (see Appendix B for
more details), that made it possible to imply the stability of the simulated gait (dynamic balanced gait).

Figure 6 Video frames of the HR while walking.
In Fig. 7, it can be seen the angular displacement
of the joints of the right and left legs. The computation of those values were made by numerical method,
however, Fig. 6 was generated using the screw-based
direct kinematics as shown in this work.
With the use of the virtual chains, the HR could
be represented as a closed mechanism and, then, the
Daviess Method was applied. In Fig. 8, it can be
seen the angular velocities of the joints of the right and
left legs of the HR. Those values were all computed at
once through the use of the Daviess Method.
The angular displacements and velocities of the
joints of the right and left arms were computed in the
same manner despite the fact they are not shown in
this article.

949

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

and  is the degree of freedom of the mechanisms
workspace. Its network matrix N has the form

For future works, there will be a continuous study
in how the tools of the Screw Theory may contribute to
humanoid robotics field. It would be very interesting
and promising to analyze the biped robot including the
static and dynamic models of the humanoid robot also
by the Screw Theory.





N(ln)  


Appendix A - Magnitude Vector q and the
Network Matrix N

qLL2

qLL3

qLL4

qLL5

qLL6

...

qRA1

qRA2

qRA3

qRA4

qRA5

qRA6

...

qLA1

qLA2

qLA3

qLA4

qLA5

qLA6

...

qvFB1

qvFB2

qvFB3

qvFB4

qvFB5

qvFB6

...

qvRL1

qvRL2

qvRL3

qvRL4

qvRL5

qvRL6

...

qvLL1

qvLL2

qvRL3

qvLL4

qvLL5

qvLL6

...

qvRA2

qvRA3

qvRA4

qvRA5

qvRA6

...
T

qvRA1
qvLA1

qvLA2

qvLA3

qvLA4

qvLA5

qvLA6





,


(18)

where Nk , for k  1, . . . , l, contains all the normalized
twists (Eq. (4)) of the loop k in a particular order.
Considering Ark the set that contains all twists of
the loop k, 0 a null column vector in 6 , OLk the orientation of the circulation law (Davies, 1981) for loop
k, and OAi the orientation of the arrow of the twist i,
the columns of the submatrix Nk of Eq. (18) can be
defined as


if i 
 Ark
0,
Nk (i)  i ,
if i  Ark and OLk  OAi (19)


i , if i  Ark and OLk 6 OAi

In short, the Daviess Method computes the magnitude of secundary joints velocities as function of the
primary ones of closed chain mechanims composed of
one or more loops. However, for the algorithm to be
executed, the matrix Ns (Eq. (9)) has to be invertible.
Therefore, the primary joints velocities have to be chosen in such a way to Ns be invertible.
Let q be the joint velocity for both rotational and
prismatic joints. The actuated joint were chosen to be
the secundary joints velocities, which will be calculated by means of the joints velocities of the virtual
chains, the primary ones. The magnitude vector q was
chosen and, then, the network matrix N was assembled. Using the notation of Fig. 4, the magnitude vector - Eq. (7) - considered in this work is given by

q  qRL1 qRL2 qRL3 qRL4 qRL5 qRL6 . . .
qLL1

N1(n)
N2(n)
..
.
Nl(n)

Appendix B - Zero-Moment Point
Support polygon is a convex polygon determined
by the contact surface between the robots feet and the
ground where the robot walks on (Vukobratovic and
Borovac, 2004).
The Zero-Momento Point (ZMP), introduced by
Vukobratovic and Stepanenko (1972), is a parameter
that can be used to analize the stability of a gait, because it analizes the contact conditions between the
robots feet and the ground.
Consider a point on the support surface where the
reaction force acts from the ground to the robot. If that
point is within the support polygon, it is the ZMP, and
the horizontal components of the reaction momentum
are null, thus, the robot will not overturn with respect
to its feet (Vukobratovic and Stepanenko, 1972 Vukobratovic and Borovac, 2004). That is, the robot will
not fall down during a gait if the ZMP is within the
support polygon.
The linear inverted pendulum (LIP-3D) approach
proposed by Kajita et al. (2003), which consider the
dynamics of the whole humanoid robot body just by
the dynamics of its center of mass, gives simplified
equations to determine the ZMP. For that reason, the
LIP-3D approach was used to computed the position
of the ZMP in this work. As proposed in Kajita et al.
(2003), the ZMP is given by

.
(17)

Now, the network matrix can assembled accordingly to Fig. 4, in which can be seen the directed
graph (digraph) notation of the kinematic struture of
humanoid robot with the virtual chains. A graph can
be understood as a set of vertices (or nodules) with
edges (or lines) connecting two or more vertices when
the graph has arrows instead of edges (or lines), it is a
digraph (Campos et al., 2005).
Using the graph notation to represent the kinematic structure of a mechanism (or robot), the vertices and edges correspond, respectively, to the links
and joints of the mechanism. The arrows, of the digraph representation, indicate the relative motion between consecutive links (for more information about
graph notation applied to mechanisms and robots, see
(Tsai, 2001)).
A parallel mechanism can be represented by the
digraph D, which is composed of l loops and n arrows.
The arrows correspond to the twists - all defined on the
same reference frame - of the considered mechanism,

pCoMz
pCoMx
gz
pCoMz
 pCoMy 
pCoMy ,
gz

pZMPx  pCoMx 
pZMPy


T
where pCoM  pCoMx pCoMy pCoMz
is the position vector of thecenter of mass of the robot and
g  0 0 gz is the gravity vector, both with
respect to the inertial reference frame.

950

Anais do XX Congresso Brasileiro de Automática
Belo Horizonte, MG, 20 a 24 de Setembro de 2014

Rocha, C. R., Tonetto, C. P. and Dias, A. (2011). A
framework for kinematic modeling of cooperative rorobot systems based on screw theory, 21th International Congress of Mechanical Engineering - COBEM
5 11501159.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank UFSC, CNPq and CAPES for the
infrastructure and funding granted.
References

Sabater, J. M., Garcia, N., Perez, C., Azorin, J. M., Saltaren,
R. J. and Yime, E. (2006). Design and analysis of a
spherical humanoid neck using screw theory, Proc. of
the 1st IEEERAS-EMBS International Conference on
Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics - BioRob,
pp. 11661171.

Bottema, O. O. and Roth, B. (1979). Theoretical Kinematics,
North-Holand Pub. Co., New York.
Campos, A., Guenther, R. and Martins, D. (2005). Differential kinematics of serial manipulators using virtual
chains, Journal of the Brazilian Society of Mechanical
Sciences and Engineering 27 345356.

Sánchez, M. E. H., Leyva, F. J. K. L., Limón, R. C. and Zannatha, J. M. I. (2011). Mechanical design and kinematic analysis of the ah1n1 humanoid robot, Proc. of
the 21st International Conference on Electrical Communications and Computers - CONIELECOMP, IEEE,
pp. 177183.

Davidson, J. K. and Hunt, K. H. (2004). Robots and
screw theory applications of kinematics and statics
to robotics, Oxford University Press on Demand.
Davies, T. H. (1981). Kirchhoffs circulation law applied to
multi-loop kinematic chains, Mechanism and machine
theory 16(3) 171183.

Santos, C., Guenther, R., Martins, D. and De Pieri, E.
(2006). Virtual kinematic chains to solve the underwater vehicle-manipulator systems redundancy, Journal
of the Brazilian Society of Mechanical Sciences and
Engineering 28 354361.

Denavit, J. (1955). A kinematic notation for lower-pair mechanisms based on matrices, Trans. of the Journal of
Applied Mechanics - ASME 22 215221.

Sentis, L. (2007). Synthesis and control of whole-body behaviors in humanoid systems, PhD thesis, Stanford,
CA, USA.

Gal, J. A., Gallo, L. M., Palla, S., Murray, G. and Klineberg,
I. (2004). Analysis of human mandibular mechanics
based on screw theory and in vivo data, Journal of
biomechanics 37(9) 14051412.

Simas, H. (2008). Planejamento de trajetórias e evitamento de colisão em tarefas de manipuladores reduntantes operando em ambientes confinados, PhD thesis,
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Centro Tecnológico. Programa de Pós-graduação em Engenharia
Mecânica, Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, Brasil.

Hunt, K. H. (2000). "dont cross-thread the screw", In A
Symposium Commemorating The Legacy, Works and
Life of Sir Robert Stawell Ball Upon the 100th Anniversary of A Treatise on The Theory of Screws, University
of Cambridge, Trinity College, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp. 137.

Toscano, G. S., Simas, H. and Castelan, E. B. (2011). Modelagem de um gerador de trajetória retilínea no espaço cartesiano para robó antropomórfico espacial, X
SBAI - Simpósio Brasileiro em Automação Inteligente
10 683688.

Kajita, S., Kanehiro, F., Kaneko, K., Fujiwara, K., Harada,
K., Yokoi, K. and Hirukawa, H. (2003). Biped walking
pattern generation by using preview control of zeromoment point, Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation - ICRA, Vol. 2,
pp. 16201626.

Tsai, L.-W. (1999). Robot Analysis The Mechanics of Serial
and Parallel Manipulators, Wiley-Interscience, New
York.

Man, C.-H., Fan, X., Li, C.-R. and Zhao, Z.-H. (2007). Kinematics analysis based on screw theory of a humanoid
robot, Journal of China University of Mining and Technology 17(1) 4952.

Tsai, L.-W. (2001). Mechanism design enumeration of
kinematic structures according to function, Vol. 16,
CRC press.

Mistry, M., Nakanishi, J., Cheng, G. and Schaal, S. (2008).
Inverse kinematics with floating base and constraints
for full body humanoid robot control, Proc. of the
8th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid
Robots - Humanoids, IEEE, pp. 2227.

Vukobratovic, M. and Borovac, B. (2004). Zero-moment
point - thirty five years of its life, International Journal of Humanoid Robotics - World Scientific 1(1) 157
173.
Vukobratovic, M. and Stepanenko, Y. (1972). On the stability of anthropomorphic systems, Proc. of the Mathematical Biosciences.

Moro, F. L., Tsagarakis, N. G. and Caldwell, D. G. (2011).
A human-like walking for the compliant humanoid coman based on com trajectory reconstruction from kinematic motion primitives, Proc. of the 11th IEEE-RAS
International Conference on Humanoid Robots - Humanoids, pp. 364370.

Zhu, D., Zhu, J. and Fang, Y. (2009). Analysis of a novel parallel manipulator for rotary humanoid wrist based on
screw theory, Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics - ROBIO., pp. 983
987.

Moro, F. L., Tsagarakis, N. G. and Caldwell, D. G. (2012).
Efficient human-like walking for the compliant humanoid coman based on kinematic motion primitives
(kmps), Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation - ICRA, pp. 20072014.
Papadopoulos, E. and Dubowsky, S. (1991). On the nature
of control algorithms for free-floating space manipulators, IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation
7(6) 750758.

951