XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF PWM STRATEGIES FOR ASYMMETRIC CASCADED
CONVERTERS
LUCAS F. ENCARNAÇÃO, LUIS F. C. MONTEIRO, MAURICIO AREDES
LEMT - Laboratório de Eletrônica de Potência e Média Tensão, Programa de Engenharia Elétrica,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro  COPPEUFRJ
Centro de Tecnologia, Bloco I, Sala 156, Cidade Universitária, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil
CEP 21.949-900, Caixa Postal 68504
E-mails lucas@lemt.ufrj.br, lfcm@lemt.ufrj.br, aredes@lemt.ufrj.br

Abstract Problems related to energy quality in medium voltage distribution systems have been affecting severity the industrial
process, especially at the industries that works with complex plants process, causing damages to the equipments and high financial losses. The necessity of a better energy quality to industry encourages the transition of the custom power equipments, typically used in low voltage systems, to work in medium voltage. The recent interest of the industries in equipments to solve the problems related to a poor energy quality in medium voltage has been instigating researches from the power-electronics society. The
multilevel power converters represent a potential breakthrough in employing switching equipments in medium voltage applications. This work presents studies related to techniques applications of multilevel asymmetric cascaded converters for distribution
synchronous static compensators (DSTATCOM) in medium voltage, in order to optimize the performance of the compensators.
Keywords Multilevel converters, modulation strategies, power quality, DSTATCOM.
Resumo Problemas relacionados  qualidade_de_energia nos sistemas_de_distribuição de média tensão vêm afetando severamente os processos_industriais, especialmente aqueles que utilizam processos de produção mais complexos, podendo causar danos aos equipamentos e perdas financeiras de larga proporção. A necessidade de uma energia de melhor qualidade para as indústrias incentivou o desenvolvimento de equipamentos custom power para a média tensão, ao passo que antes eram tipicamente dimensionados para a baixa tensão. O recente interesse das indústrias em equipamentos para solucionar os problemas da baixa qualidade_de_energia na média tensão vem despertando o interesse da comunidade de eletrônica_de_potência. Estudos identificaram
nos conversores_multiníveis uma grande potencialidade de modo a viabilizar o uso de equipamentos chaveados em aplicações de
média tensão. Este trabalho apresenta estudos para a aplicação de técnicas de conversores_multiníveis em cascata aos compensadores síncronos estáticos em sistemas_de_distribuição (DSTATCOM) em média tensão, de forma a otimizar o desempenho dos
compensadores.
Palavras-chave ., 1996). Theoretically, all
multilevel structures have similar characteristics.
However, its well known from previous works (Rodrigues, et al., 2002) that the asymmetric cascaded
converter topology presents the advantaged to produce the same output multilevel voltage with minimum number of power semiconductor devices, when
compared with the others topologies. However, this
topology presents a considerable computation effort,
especially to control each one of the dc-link voltages.
Moreover there are some aspects that limit its application, for example inhibits back-to-back configuration.
The operation principle of a static synchronous
compensator, which is the goal of this work, is the
support of reactive power, leaving only a small interchange of the real power to keep regulated the dclink capacitor voltages as presented in (Akagi, et al.,
2007), (Freitas, et al., 2005) and (Blazic, et al.,
2006).
In order to achieve a better performance for the
multilevel converters, it is important not only to
choose the best multilevel topology for a specific

1 Introduction
The increase of the power demand combined
with the modernization of the industrial plants, registered in the last decades, resulted in the proliferation
of power electronic equipments connected directly in
medium voltage feeders. In general, power electronics equipments are designed to work with minimum
standards of energy quality. In this context, the necessity to guarantee a better energy quality for the
industrial process in medium voltage systems encouraged the development of specific custom power
devices for medium voltage applications, which were
usually rated for low voltage systems, as the static
synchronous compensators.
The research of specific custom power devices
for high power systems has aroused the interest of
the power electronics society, which identified in the
multilevel converters a great potential to break the
barrier of switching equipment in medium voltage
applications (Bum-Seok, et al., 1998). Indeed, the
multilevel power converters present several advantages when compared with the conventional twolevel converters and the most important topologies

1555

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

application, but also improve the modulation strategy
related to the topology used.
In this context, this paper presents a comparison
of three different pulse width modulation (PWM)
strategies in order to achieve an optimized modulation strategy, for the cascaded multilevel converter.

3 General Modulation Strategies
The general modulation strategy, commonly
used in the asymmetric cascaded converters, is the
staircase modulation combined with the PWM modulation. The higher power cells operate at lower frequencies (staircase modulation) transferring the major part of the energy, while the lower power cell
operates with higher frequencies with PWM, reducing the harmonic content of the total output voltage.
The general modulation strategy used in this work is
for the selected multilevel converter is presented in
Figure 2.
The sinusoidal reference signal (Vref) is compared with the first level of the converter (L1) generating the output waveform for the first cell (Vout1).
The reference signal of the second cell (Vref2) is obtained subtracting Vout1 from Vref. The second reference (Vref2) will be compared with second level (L2)
generating the output voltage for the second cell
(Vout2). The reference of the third cell (Vref3) is obtained with a similar method, however, this last reference will be compared with a triangular carrier
(Vcarrier) generating the output voltage for the third
cell (Vout3). Finally, the sum of all voltage cells leads
to a nineteen level output phase voltage (Vout).
The dc capacitor voltages are calculated using
(1) in order to achieve the maximum output voltage
levels, equally spaced, for the combined modulation
(Silva, et al. 2005). In this case, using only three
cells in the multilevel converter, the calculated dc
capacitor voltages are Vcc, 2Vcc and 6Vcc, achieving
19 levels of output voltages.

2 Multilevel Power Converter
Basically, the power circuit of the asymmetric
cascaded converter is composed by single-phase fullbridged inverters, with different power levels, connected in series. The quantity of the inverters is directly associated with the total harmonic content
(THD) and the maximum value of the output voltage
synthesized by the asymmetric cascaded converter.
Therefore, the number of the series connected inverters is calculated according to the maximum standard
THD limit, in order to guarantee the power quality of
the equipment connected at the point of common of
coupling (PCC).
Nowadays, there are two standards of voltage
THD limits for medium voltage applications in Brazil. The first one is recommendation of the IEEE,
which suggests a maximum THD of 5 for equipments connected in systems with voltage-levels up to
69 kV (IEEE std 519 1993). The second one, provided by ANELL standard, demands a maximum
THD of 8 for equipments connected in systems
from 1 kV to 13.8 kV (PRODIST 2005).
Therefore, in order to fulfill both standards, it is
necessary a minimum of three single-phase bridged
inverters, per phase, that results in a THD of 2,
with a typical staircase modulation (Encarnação,
2009). Figure 1 shows the asymmetric cascaded multilevel converter composed by nine single-phase fullbridged inverters, for three-phase systems application with Y-connection used in this work.

n 1

Vn  2 Vk

( n  2)

(1)

k 1

4 Comparison of PWM strategies
Although the generalized modulation strategy,
presented in Figure 2, provides voltages with a lower
THD. Through the improvement of the PWM technique, it is possible to reduce even more the harmonic distortion, without increase the switching losses of
the multilevel converter.

Figure 2. General modulation strategy for asymmetric converter.

Figure 1. Asymmetric cascaded multilevel converter.

1556

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

Indeed, the PWM switching techniques are not
deeply investigated, and as a consequence the harmonic cancelation of the produced voltages is not
optimized. Therefore, in order to achieve the best
modulation strategy, the lower power cell of the multilevel converter, illustrated in Figure 1, was simulated with three different types of PWM techniques
(bipolar, unipolar and discontinuous). The remaining
higher power cells of the multilevel converter are
modulated with a staircase strategy, as already introduced in Figure 2.

quency for the output voltage of the lower power
cell, with bipolar PWM, is the same of each voltage
leg, thus no advantage is obtained with this modulation technique. The THD of the phase and line voltage of the multilevel converter are 11.8 and 6.3,
respectively.
4.2 General Modulation with Unipolar PWM
In the unipolar PWM, the lower power cell of
the multilevel converter is modulated by only one
triangular carrier signal and two reference signals, in
counter-phase with each other, as illustrated in Figure 5. In this technique, each leg of the converter is
modulated separately. Thus, when both legs are
switched to same voltage level, the output of the
lower power cell (VA3) is zero. This combination
provides a third level in the output of the converter,
improving the harmonic performance of the multilevel converter.
The phase (VAN) and line (VAB) output voltages
of the multilevel converter, the voltages legs (VLA1
and VLA2) and the output voltage (VA3) of the lower
power cell, with the unipolar PWM, are presented in
Figure 6. The switching frequency of the carrier signal is 4980 Hz for each leg of the lower power cell.

4.1 General Modulation with Bipolar PWM
In the bipolar PWM, the lower power cell of the
multilevel converter is modulated by only one triangular carrier signal and one reference signal, as illustrated in Figure 3. Thus, when a positive voltage is
needed in the output of the lower power cell (VA3) the
first leg of the single-phase inverter (VLA1) is switched to a positive output while the second leg (VLA2) is
switched to a negative output.
The phase (VAN) and line (VAB) output voltages
of the multilevel converter, the voltages legs (VLA1
and VLA2) and the output voltage (VA3) of the lower
power cell, with the bipolar PWM, are presented in
Figure 4. The switching frequency of the carrier signal is 4980 Hz for each leg of the lower power cell.
It can be observed that the resulting switching fre-

Figure 3.Bipolar PWM control signals for lower cell of phase a.

Figure 5. Unipolar PWM control signals for lower cell of phase a.
VAB
VAN

VLA1

f(switching)  4980Hz

VLA2

f(switching)  4980Hz

VA3  VLA1  VLA2

Figure 4. Bipolar PWM output voltages.

THD VAN  5.3
THD VAB  4.5

f(resulting)  9960Hz

Figure 6. Unipolar PWM output voltages.

1557

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

However, the resulting switching frequency, of the
output voltage corresponds to 9960 Hz. Thus, based
on unipolar switching frequency it is possible to increase the resulted switching frequency, with the
same number of switching, per cycle, in the multilevel converter. This improvement is verified observing the THD of the phase and line voltage of the
multilevel converter, which are 5.3 and 4.5, respectively.

discontinuous PWM technique is increase to
9960 Hz. This combination also provides a third level in the output voltage of the converter, as the unipolar modulation. Moreover, this technique also
improves even more the harmonic performance of
the multilevel converter. The phase (VAN) and line
(VAB) output voltages of the multilevel converter, the
voltages legs (VLA1 and VLA2) and the output voltage
(VA3) of the lower power cell with the discontinuous
PWM are presented in Figure 8. The switching frequency of both carrier signals and the resulting
switching frequency of the output voltage are
9960 Hz. The improvement of this modulation can
be verified in the THD of the phase and line voltage,
which are 5.3 and 1.7, respectively.

4.3 General Modulation with Discontinuous PWM
In the discontinuous PWM, the lower power cell
of the multilevel converter is modulated by two triangular carrier signals, in counter-phase with each
other, and two modified reference signals, as illustrated in Figure 7. In this technique, the reference
signals are modified that whenever a positive output
is required, only the first leg of the inverter is PWM
and when a negative output is required only the
second leg of the inverter is PWM (Holmes, 2003). It
can be observed that each leg of the single-phase
inverter is modulated only half-time per period.
Therefore, in order to normalize the number of
switching per cycle, the switching frequency of the

4.4 Harmonic Analysis of the PWM strategies
The harmonic spectrum of the phase and line
voltages of the multilevel converter, with all three
modulation techniques, is analyzed in this section in
order to compare the main characteristics of each
strategy.
As mentioned before, the bipolar PWM uses only one reference and one carrier signals. Thus, the
output voltage of one leg is exactly the opposite of
the other one. This modulation provides a concentrated harmonic energy directly in the first multiple
of the carrier, for all the three-phase voltages of the
converter (see Figure 9a). Therefore, this common
mode harmonic energy is totally eliminated in the
line voltage (see Figure 9b). However, the disadvantage of this characteristic is that all the switching
transition occurs at the same time, and the resulting
switching frequency of the lower power-cell output
voltage is the same of each voltage leg (see Figure 4).
The advantaged of the unipolar PWM is that this
modulation uses different reference signals for each
leg (see Figure 5). Thus, the switching transition
occurs at different time-instants, shifting the resulting switching frequency by two times (see Figure
10a), which improves the harmonic spectrum when
compared with the bipolar modulation. On the other
hand, this modulation spreads the harmonic energy
in the sidebands harmonics (see Figure 10a), and the
elimination of these harmonic-components is not
optimized (see Figure 10b).
Therefore, in order to achieve an optimized
modulation strategy, the discontinuous PWM combines the advantages of the bipolar and unipolar
modulations. This modulation uses two carrier signals in counter-phase for each leg in order to concentrate the harmonic energy directly in the first multiple of the carrier signal, as in the two-level modulation. However, based only in this proposal, the advantages provided by the three-level modulation is
lost, which one is harmonically superior in comparison to the two-level modulation, unless the reference
signal is modified in order to achieve a discontinuous
modulation (see Figure 7) (McGrath, et al. 2000).

Figure 7. Discontinuous PWM control signals of phase a.

Figure 8. Discontinuous PWM output voltages.

1558

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

This proposed modulation strategy still concentrates the harmonic energy in a common mode modulation, as in the bipolar modulation (see Figure 11a). Furthermore, as mentioned before, the
switching the frequency of each leg of the converter
is multiplied by two in order to normalize the num-

ber of switching per cycle. Thus, the harmonic spectrum of the discontinuous modulation is concentrated
around 9960 Hz, as in the unipolar modulation (see
Figure 11a).
Therefore, the harmonic energy concentrated in
common mode modulation is totally eliminated in the
line voltage (see Figure 11b), improving the harmonic performance of the multilevel converter.
5 Experimental Results
The experimental results are obtained through a
2.0 kVA laboratorial prototype. The diagram circuit
of the prototype and the control circuits of the static
synchronous compensator are presented in detailed
in (Encarnação, et al. 2008).
The prototype was tested with the general modulation strategy with the same three different types of
PWM techniques (bipolar, unipolar and discontinuous). The experimental results of the output phase
and line voltages of the multilevel converter and the
output voltage of the lower power cell with the bipolar, unipolar and discontinuous PWM are illustrated
in Figures 12 to 14, respectively.
As expected, the discontinuous modulation
presents the better performance in comparison with
the remaining PWM techniques, which proves the
superiority of the proposed modulation. It is worth to
comment that in unipolar and bipolar switching techniques, the base frequency of the carrier signal is
equal to 4980 Hz and, in the discontinuous modulation the carrier signal was set up to 9960 Hz. Furthermore, the simulations and experimental results
are presented in Table 1.

Figure 9a. Harmonic spectrum of VAN with bipolar PWM.

Figure 9b. Harmonic spectrum of VAB with bipolar PWM.

Figure 10a. Harmonic spectrum of VAN with unipolar PWM.

Table 1. Simulation and experimental THD results
THD Simulation

Bipolar
Unipolar
Discontinuous

Figure 10b. Harmonic spectrum of VAB with unipolar PWM.

VAN
11.8
5.3
5.3

VAB
6.3
4.5
1.7

THD Experimental

VAN
11.9
5.5
4.3

VAB
5.2
4.7
3.6

6 Conclusions
Recently, several studies have been focused in
the optimization of the power circuit of the multilevel converter, in order to improve the harmonic performance of the output voltage. However, it is also
important to pay attention in the modulations strategies, which can be manipulated for each multilevel
topology in order to improve the harmonic performance of the output voltage.
In this article it has been proposed an alternative
to improve the performance of a nineteen asymmetric
cascaded multilevel converter without increase the
switching losses. Furthermore, the proposed pulse
width modulation strategy is compared with the bi-

Figure 11a. Harmonic spectrum of VAN with discontinuous PWM.

Figure 11b. Harmonic spectrum of VAB with discontinuous PWM.

1559

XVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Automática  12 a 16 Setembro 2010, Bonito-MS.

va

References

vab

Bum-Seok, S. Gautam, S. Manjrekar, M. and Lipo
T. (1998). Multilevel Power Conversion - An
Overview Of Topologies And Modulation
Strategies.
International
Conference
on
Optimization of Electrical and Electronic
Equipments, vol. 2, pp. 11-24.
Lai, J.S. Peng, F.Z. (1996). Multilevel Converters 
A New Breed of Power Converters. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Applications, vol. 32,
no. 3, pp. 509-517.
Rodrigues, J. Jim-Sheng, L. and Peng, F. Z. (2002).
Multilevel Inverters A Survey of Topologies,
Controls and Applications. IEEE Transactions
on Ind. Electronics, vol. 49, No. 4, pp. 724-738.
Akagi, H. Inoue, S. and Yoshii T. (2007). Control
and Performance of a Transformerless Cascade
PWM STATCOM with Star Configuration.
IEEE Transactions on Ind. Applications, vol. 43,
no. 4, pp 1041-1049.
Freitas, W. Morelato, A. Xu, W. and Sato F.
(2005). Impacts of AC Generators and
DSTATCOM devices on the dynamic
performance of distribution systems. IEEE
Transactions. on power Delivery, vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 1493-1501.
Blazic, B. and Papic, I. (2006). Improved D-StatCom
Control for Operation with Unbalanced Currents
and Voltages. IEEE Transactions on power
Delivery, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 225-233.
IEEE std 519 (1993). IEEE Recommended Practices
and Requirements for Harmonic Control in
Electrical Power Systems.
Agência Nacional de Energia Elétrica  ANEEL
(2005). Qualidade de Energia  Procedimentos
de Distribuição de Energia Elétrica no Sistema
Elétrico Nacional  Módulo 8 - PRODIST.
Encarnação, L.F. (2009). A Multilevel Static
Synchronous Compensator for Medium Voltage
Distribution Systems, Ph.D Thesis (In
Portuguese), Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro.
Holmes, D.G. Lipo, T.A. (2003). Pulse Width
Modulation for Power Converters  Principles
and Practices, IEEE Press Wiley-Interscience.
Silva, L.A. Pimentel, S.P. and Pomilio, J.A. (2005).
Nineteen-level Active Filter System using
Asymmetrical Cascaded Converter with DC
Voltages Control. Power Electronics Specialists
Conference, pp. 303-308.
McGrath, B.P. Holmes, D.G. Manjrekar, M. Lipo,
T.A. (2000). An Improved Modulation Strategy
for a Hybrid Multilevel Inverter. IEEE Industry
Applications Conference, vol. 4, pp. 2086-2093.
Encarnação, L.F Emmerik, E.L. and Aredes, M.
(2008). An Optimized Cascaded Multilevel
Static Synchronous Compensator for Medium
Voltage Distribution Systems. Power Electronics
Specialists Conference, pp. 4805-4811.

vbipolar

THD(va)  11.9
THD(vab)  5.2

Figure 12. Experimental results with bipolar PWM.

va
vab

vunipolar

THD(va)  5.5
THD(vab)  4.7

Figure 13. Experimental results with unipolar PWM.

va
vab

vdiscontinuous

THD(va)  4.3
THD(vab)  3.6
Ch1, DC coupling, 1.0E2 Vdiv, 2.5E-3 sdiv, 2500 points, Sample mode
Ch2, DC coupling, 2.0E2 Vdiv, 2.5E-3 sdiv, 2500 points, Sample mode
Ch3, DC coupling, 2.0E1 Vdiv, 2.5E-3 sdiv, 2500 points, Sample mode

Figure 14. Experimental results with discontinuous PWM.

polar and unipolar PWM strategies. Indeed, as it can
be observed thought simulations and experimental
results, that the proposed PWM strategy presents a
better harmonic performance when compared with
the others PWM strategies.

1560